WHY I'M NOT WHERE YOU ARE 


5/21/63 

To my unborn child: I haven't always been silent, I used to talk and talk and talk and talk, 

I couldn't keep my mouth shut, the silence overtook me like a cancer, it was one of my first 
meals in America, I tried to tell the waiter, "The way you just handed me that knife, that 
reminds me of - ' but I couldn't finish the sentence, her name wouldn't come, I tried again, 
it wouldn't come, she was locked inside me, how strange, I thought, how frustrating, how 
pathetic, how sad, I took a pen from my pocket and wrote 'Anna' on my napkin, it hap- 
pened again two days later, and then again the following day, she was the only thing I 
wanted to talk about, it kept happening, when I didn't have a pen. I'd write 'Anna' in the 
air - backward and right to left - so that the person I was speaking with could see, and 
when I was on the phone I'd dial the numbers - 2, 6, 6, 2 - so that the person could hear 
what I couldn't, myself, say. 'And' was the next word I lost, probably because it was so 
close to her name, what a simple word to say, what a profound word to lose, I had to say 
'ampersand,' which sounded ridiculous, but there it is. I'd like a coffee ampersand some- 
thing sweet,' nobody would choose to be like that. 'Want' was a word I lost early on, which 
is not to say that I stopped wanting things - 1 wanted things more - I just stopped being 
able to express the want, so instead I said 'desire,' 'I desire two rolls,' I would tell the baker, 
but that wasn't quite right, the meaning of my thoughts started to float away from me, like 
leaves that fall from a tree into a river, I was the tree, the world was the river. I lost 'come' 
one afternoon with the dogs in the park, I lost 'fine' as the barber turned me toward the 
mirror, I lost 'shame' - the verb and the noun in the same moment; it was a shame. I lost 
'carry', I lost the things I carried - 'daybook,' 'pencil,' 'pocket change,' 'wallet' - 1 even lost 
'loss.' After a time, I had only a handful of words left, if someone did something nice for 
me, I would tell him, 'The thing that comes before 'you're welcome,' if I was hungry. I'd 
point at my stomach and say, 'I am the opposite of full,' I'd lost 'yes,' but I still had 'no,' so 
if someone asked me, 'Are you Thomas?' I would answer, 'Not no,' but then I lost 'no,' I 
went to a tattoo parlor and had YES written onto the palm of my left hand, and NO onto 
my right palm, what can I say, it hasn't made life wonderful, it's made life possible, when I 
rub my hands against each other in the middle of winter I am warming myself with the 
friction of YES and NO, when I clap my hands I am showing my appreciation through the 
uniting and parting of YES and NO, I signify 'book' by peeling open my clapped hands, 
every book, for me, is the balance of YES and NO, even this one, my last one, especially 
this one. Does it break my heart, of course, every moment of every day, into more pieces 
than my heart was made of, I never thought of myself as quiet, much less silent, I never 
thought about things at all, everything changed, the distance that wedged itself between 
me and my happiness wasn't the world, it wasn't the bombs and burning buildings, it was 
me, my thinking, the cancer of never letting go, is ignorance bliss, I don't know, but it's so 
painful to think, and tell me, what did thinking ever do for me, to what great place did 
thinking ever bring me? I think and think and think. I've thought myself out of happiness 
one million times, but never once into it. 'I' was the last word I was able to speak aloud. 
which is a terrible thing, but there it is, I would walk around the neighborhood saying, 'I I 
II.’ 

'You want a cup of coffee, Thomas?' 

I.’ 

'And maybe something sweet?' 

I.’ 

'How about this weather?' 

I: 

'You look upset. Is anything wrong?' I wanted to say, 'Of course,' I wanted to ask, 'Is any- 
thing right?' I wanted to pull the thread, unravel the scarf of my silence and start again 
from the beginning, but instead I said, 'I.' I know I'm not alone in this disease, you hear the 
old people in the street and some of them are moaning, 'Ay yay yay,' but some of them are 
clinging to their last word, 'I,' they're saying, because they're desperate, it's not a com- 
plaint, it's a prayer, and then I lost 'I' and my silence was complete. I started carrying blank 
books like this one around, which I would fill with all the things I couldn't say, that's how 
it started, if I wanted two rolls of bread from the baker, I would write 'I want two rolls' on 
the next blank page and show it to him, and if I needed help from someone. I'd write 
'Help,' and if something made me want to laugh. I'd write 'Ha ha ha!' and instead of sing- 
ing in the shower I would write out the lyrics of my favorite songs, the ink would turn the 
water blue or red or green, and the music would run down my legs, at the end of each day 
I would take the book to bed with me and read through the pages of my life: 

I want two rolls 

And I wouldn't say no to something sweet 
I'm sorry, this is the smallest I've got 
Start spreading the news . 

The regular, please 

Thank you, but I'm about to burst 

I'm not sure, but it's late 

Help 

Ha ha ha! 

It wasn't unusual for me to run out of blank pages before the end of the day, so should I 
have to say something to someone on the street or in the bakery or at the bus stop, the best 
I could do was flip back through the daybook and find the most fitting page to recycle, if 
someone asked me, 'How are you feeling?' it might be that my best response was to point 
at, 'The regular, please,' or perhaps, 'And I wouldn't say no to something sweet,' when my 
only friend, Mr. Richter, suggested, 'What if you tried to make a sculpture again? What's 
the worst thing that could happen?' I shuffled halfway into the filled book: 'I'm not sure, 
but it's late.' I went through hundreds of books, thousands of them, they were all over the 
apartment, I used them as doorstops and paperweights, I stacked them if I needed to reach 
something, I slid them under the legs of wobbly tables, I used them as trivets and coasters,
to line the birdcages and to swat insects from whom I begged forgiveness, I never thought 
of my books as being special, only necessary, I might rip out a page - 'I'm sorry, this is the 
smallest I've got' - to wipe up some mess, or empty a whole day to pack up the emergency 
light bulbs, I remember spending an afternoon with Mr. Richter in the Central Park Zoo, I 
went weighted down with food for the animals, only someone who'd never been an ani- 
mal would put up a sign saying not to feed them, Mr. Richter told a joke, I tossed ham- 
burger to the lions, he rattled the cages with his laughter, the animals went to the corners, 
we laughed and laughed, together and separately, out loud and silently, we were deter- 
mined to ignore whatever needed to be ignored, to build a new world from nothing if 
nothing in our world could be salvaged, it was one of the best days of my life, a day dur- 
ing which I lived my life and didn't think about my life at all. Later that year, when snow 
started to hide the front steps, when morning became evening as I sat on the sofa, buried 
under everything I'd lost, I made a fire and used my laughter for kindling: 'Ha ha ha!' 

'Ha ha ha!' 

'Ha ha ha!' 

'Ha ha ha!' I was already out of words when I met your mother, that may have been what 
made our marriage possible, she never had to know me. We met at the Columbian Bakery 
on Broadway, we'd both come to New York lonely, broken and confused, I was sitting in 
the corner stirring cream into coffee, around and around like a little solar system, the place 
was half empty but she slid right up next to me, 'You've lost everything,' she said, as if we 
were sharing a secret, 'I can see.' If I'd been someone else in a different world I'd've done 
something different, but I was myself, and the world was the world, so I was silent, 'It's 
OK,' she whispered, her mouth too close to my ear, 'Me too. You can probably see it from 
across a room. It's not like being Italian. We stick out like sore thumbs. Look at how they 
look. Maybe they don't know that we've lost everything, but they know something's off.' 
She was the tree and also the river flowing away from the tree, 'There are worse things,' 
she said, 'worse than being like us. Look, at least we're alive,' I could see that she wanted 
those last words back, but the current was too strong, 'And the weather is one hundred 
dollars, also, don't let me forget to mention,' I stirred my coffee. 'But I hear it's supposed to 
get crummy tonight. Or that's what the man on the radio said, anyway,' I shrugged, I did- 
n't know what 'crummy' meant, 'I was gonna go buy some tuna fish at the A&P. I clipped 
some coupons from the Post this morning. They're five cans for the price of three. What a 
deal! I don't even like tuna fish. It gives me stomachaches, to be frank. But you can't beat 
that price,' she was trying to make me laugh, but I shrugged my shoulders and stirred my 
coffee, 'I don't know anymore,' she said. 'The weather is one hundred dollars, and the man 
on the radio says it's gonna get crummy tonight, so maybe I should go to the park instead, 
even if I burn easily. And anyway, it's not like I'm gonna eat the tuna fish tonight, right? 
Or ever, if I'm being frank. It gives me stomachaches, to be perfectly frank. So there's no 
rush in that department. But the weather, now that won't stick around. Or at least it never 
has. And I should tell you also that my doctor says getting out is good for me. My eyes are 
crummy, and he says I don't get out nearly enough, and that if I got out a little more, if I 
were a little less afraid…! ' She was extending a hand that I didn't know how to take, 
so I broke its fingers with my silence, she said, 'You don't want to talk to me, do you?' I 
took my daybook out of my knapsack and found the next blank page, the second to last. 'I 
don't speak,' I wrote. 'I'm sorry.' She looked at the piece of paper, then at me, then back at 
the piece of paper, she covered her eyes with her hands and cried, tears seeped between 
her fingers and collected in the little webs, she cried and cried and cried, there weren't any 
napkins nearby, so I ripped the page from the book - 'I don't speak. I'm sorry.' - and used 
it to dry her cheeks, my explanation and apology ran down her face like mascara, she took 
my pen from me and wrote on the next blank page of my daybook, the final one: 

Please marry me 

I flipped back and pointed at, 'Ha ha ha!' She flipped forward and pointed at, 'Please 
marry me.' I flipped back and pointed at, 'I'm sorry, this is the smallest I've got.' She 
flipped forward and pointed at, 'Please marry me.' I flipped back and pointed at, 'I'm not 
sure, but it's late.' She flipped forward and pointed at, 'Please marry me,' and this time put 
her finger on 'Please,' as if to hold down the page and end the conversation, or as if she 
were trying to push through the word and into what she really wanted to say. I thought 
about life, about my life, the embarrassments, the little coincidences, the shadows of alarm 
clocks on bedside tables. I thought about my small victories and everything I'd seen de- 
stroyed, I'd swum through mink coats on my parents' bed while they hosted downstairs. 
I'd lost the only person I could have spent my only life with. I'd left behind a thousand 
tons of marble, I could have released sculptures, I could have released myself from the 
marble of myself. I'd experienced joy, but not nearly enough, could there be enough? The 
end of suffering does not justify the suffering, and so there is no end to suffering, what a 
mess I am, I thought, what a fool, how foolish and narrow, how worthless, how pinched 
and pathetic, how helpless. None of my pets know their own names, what kind of person 
am I? I lifted her finger like a record needle and flipped back, one page at a time: 

Help 

5/21/63 

Your mother and I never talk about the past, that's a rule. I go to the door when she's using 
the bathroom, and she never looks over my shoulder when I'm writing, those are two 
more rules. I open doors for her but I never touch her back as she passes through, she 
never lets me watch her cook, she folds my pants but leaves my shirts by the ironing 
board, I never light candles when she's in the room, but I do blow candles out. It's a rule 
that we never listen to sad music, we made that rule early on, songs are as sad as the lis- 
tener, we hardly ever listen to music. I change the sheets every morning to wash away my 
writing, we never sleep in the same bed twice, we never watch television shows about sick 
children, she never asks me how my day was, we always eat on the same side of the table, 
facing the window. So many rules, sometimes I can't remember what's a rule and what is- 
n't, if anything we do is for its own sake, I'm leaving her today, is that the rule we've been 
organizing ourselves around this whole time, or am I about to break the organizing rule? I 
used to ride the bus here at the end of every week, to take the magazines and newspapers 
that people left behind when they got on their planes, your mother reads and reads and 
reads, she wants English, as much as she can get her hands on, is that a rule? I'd come late 


55 



Friday afternoon, it used to be that I would go home with a magazine or two and maybe a 
paper, but she wanted more, more slang, more figures of speech, the bee's knees, the cat's 
pajamas, horse of a different color, dog-tired, she wanted to talk like she was born here, 
like she never came from anywhere else, so I started bringing a knapsack, which I would 
stuff with as much as would fit, it got heavy, my shoulders burned with English, she 
wanted more English, so I brought a suitcase, I filled it until I could barely zip the zipper, 
the suitcase sagged with English, my arms burned with English, my hands did, my knuck- 
les, people must have thought I was actually going somewhere, the next morning my back 
ached with English, I found myself sticking around, spending more time than was neces- 
sary, watching the planes bring people and take people away, I started coming twice a 
week and staying for several hours, when it was time to go home I didn't want to leave, 
and when I wasn't here, I wanted to be here, now I come every morning before we open 
the store, and every evening after dinner, so what is it, am I hoping to see someone I know 
get off one of the planes, am I waiting for a relative who never will come, do I expect 
Anna? No, that's not it, it's not about my joy, the relief of my burden. I like to see people 
reunited, maybe that's a silly thing, but what can I say, I like to see people run to each 
other, I like the kissing and the crying, I like the impatience, the stories that the mouth 
can't tell fast enough, the ears that aren't big enough, the eyes that can't take in all of the 
change, I like the hugging, the bringing together, the end of missing someone, I sit on the 
side with a coffee and write in my daybook, I examine the flight schedules that I've al- 
ready memorized, I observe, I write, I try not to remember the life that I didn't want to lose 
but lost and have to remember, being here fills my heart with so much joy, even if the joy 
isn't mine, and at the end of the day I fill the suitcase with old news. Maybe that was the 
story I was telling myself when I met your mother, I thought we could run to each other, I 
thought we could have a beautiful reunion, although we had hardly known each other in 
Dresden. It didn't work. We've wandered in place, our arms outstretched, but not toward 
each other, they're marking off distance, everything between us has been a rule to govern 
our life together, everything a measurement, a marriage of millimeters, of rules, when she 
gets up to go to the shower, I feed the animals - that's a rule - so she doesn't have to be 
self-conscious, she finds things to keep herself busy when I undress at night - rule - she 
goes to the door to make sure it's locked, she double-checks the oven, she tends to her col- 
lections in the china cabinet, she checks, again, the curlers that she hasn't used since we 
met, and when she gets undressed. I've never been so busy in my life. Only a few months 
into our marriage, we started marking off areas in the apartment as 'Nothing Places,' in 
which one could be assured of complete privacy, we agreed that we never would look at 
the marked-off zones, that they would be nonexistent territories in the apartment in which 
one could temporarily cease to exist, the first was in the bedroom, by the foot of the bed, 
we marked it off with red tape on the carpet, and it was just large enough to stand in, it 
was a good place to disappear, we knew it was there but we never looked at it, it worked 
so well that we decided to create a Nothing Place in the living room, it seemed necessary, 
because there are times when one needs to disappear while in the living room, and some- 
times one simply wants to disappear, we made this zone slightly larger so that one of us 
could lie down in it, it was a rule that you never would look at that rectangle of space, it 
didn't exist, and when you were in it, neither did you, for a while that was enough, but 


56 



only for a while, we required more rules, on our second anniversary we marked off the 
entire guest room as a Nothing Place, it seemed like a good idea at the time, sometimes a 
small patch at the foot of the bed or a rectangle in the living room isn't enough privacy, the 
side of the door that faced the guest room was Nothing, the side that faced the hallway 
was Something, the knob that connected them was neither Something nor Nothing. The 
walls of the hallway were Nothing, even pictures need to disappear, especially pictures, 
but the hallway itself was Something, the bathtub was Nothing, the bathwater was Some- 
thing, the hair on our bodies was Nothing, of course, but once it collected around the drain 
it was Something, we were trying to make our lives easier, trying, with all of our rules, to 
make life effortless. But a friction began to arise between Nothing and Something, in the 
morning the Nothing vase cast a Something shadow, like the memory of someone you've 
lost, what can you say about that, at night the Nothing light from the guest room spilled 
under the Nothing door and stained the Something hallway, there's nothing to say. It be- 
came difficult to navigate from Something to Something without accidentally walking 
through Nothing, and when Something - a key, a pen, a pocketwatch - was accidentally 
left in a Nothing Place, it never could be retrieved, that was an unspoken rule, like nearly 
all of our rules have been. There came a point, a year or two ago, when our apartment was 
more Nothing than Something, that in itself didn't have to be a problem, it could have 
been a good thing, it could have saved us. We got worse. I was sitting on the sofa in the 
second bedroom one afternoon, thinking and thinking and thinking, when I realized I was 
on a Something island. 'How did I get here,' I wondered, surrounded by Nothing, 'and 
how can I get back?' The longer your mother and I lived together, the more we took each 
other's assumptions for granted, the less was said, the more misunderstood. I'd often re- 
member having designated a space as Nothing when she was sure we had agreed that it 
was Something, our unspoken agreements led to disagreements, to suffering, I started to 
undress right in front of her, this was just a few months ago, and she said, "Thomas! What 
are you doing!' and I gestured, 'I thought this was Nothing,' covering myself with one of 
my daybooks, and she said, 'It's Something!' We took the blueprint of our apartment from 
the hallway closet and taped it to the inside of the front door, with an orange and a green 
marker we separated Something from Nothing. 'This is Something,' we decided. 

'This is Nothing.' 

'Something.' 

'Something.' 

'Nothing.' 

'Something.' 

'Nothing.' 

'Nothing.' 

'Nothing.' Everything was forever fixed, there would be only peace and happiness, it was- 
n't until last night, our last night together, that the inevitable question finally arose, I told 
her, 'Something,' by covering her face with my hands and then lifting them like a marriage 
veil. 'We must be.' But I knew, in the most protected part of my heart, the truth. 

Excuse me, do you know what time it is? 


57 



The beautiful girl didn't know the time, she was in a hurry, she said, 'Good luck,' I smiled, 
she hurried off, her skirt catching the air as she ran, sometimes I can hear my bones strain- 
ing under the weight of all of the lives I'm not living. In this life, I'm sitting in an airport 
trying to explain myself to my unborn son. I'm filling the pages of this, my last daybook. 
I'm thinking of a loaf of black bread that I left out one night, the next morning I saw the 
outline of the mouse that had eaten through it, I cut the loaf into slices and saw the mouse 
at each moment. I'm thinking of Anna, I would give everything never to think about her 
again, I can only hold on to the things I want to lose. I'm thinking of the day we met, she 
accompanied her father to meet my father, they were friends, they had talked about art 
and literature before the war, but once the war began, they talked only about war, I saw 
her approaching when she was still far away, I was fifteen, she was seventeen, we sat to- 
gether on the grass while our fathers spoke inside, how could we have been younger? We 
talked about nothing in particular, but it felt like we were talking about the most impor- 
tant things, we pulled fistfuls of grass, and I asked her if she liked to read, she said, 'No, 
but there are books that I love, love, love,' she said it just like that, three times, 'Do you like 
to dance?' she asked, 'Do you like to swim?' I asked, we looked at each other until it felt 
like everything would burst into flames, 'Do you like animals?' 

'Do you like bad weather?' 

'Do you like your friends?' I told her about my sculpture, she said, 'I'm sure you will be a 
great artist.' 

'How can you be sure?' 

'I just am.' I told her I already was a great artist, because that's how unsure of myself I was, 
she said, 'I meant famous,' I told her that wasn't what mattered to me, she asked what mat- 
tered to me, I told her I did it for its own sake, she laughed and said, 'You don't under- 
stand yourself,' I said, 'Of course I do,' she said, 'Of course,' I said, 'I do!' She said, 'There's 
nothing wrong with not understanding yourself,' she saw through the shell of me into the 
center of me, 'Do you like music?' Our fathers came out of the house and stood at the door, 
one of them asked, 'What are we going to do?' I knew that our time together was almost 
over, I asked her if she liked sports, she asked me if I liked chess, I asked her if she liked 
fallen trees, she went home with her father, the center of me followed her, but I was left 
with the shell of me, I needed to see her again, I couldn't explain my need to myself, and 
that's why it was such a beautiful need, there's nothing wrong with not understanding 
yourself. The next day, I walked half an hour to her house, fearing someone would see me 
on the road between our neighborhoods, too much to explain that I couldn't explain, I 
wore a broad-brimmed hat and kept my head down, I heard the footsteps of those passing 
me, and I didn't know if they were a man's, woman's, or child's, I felt as if I were walking 
the rungs of a ladder laid flat, I was too ashamed or embarrassed to make myself known to 
her, how would I have explained it, was I walking up the ladder or down? I hid behind a 
mound of earth that had been dug up to make a grave for some old books, literature was 
the only religion her father practiced, when a book fell on the floor he kissed it, when he 
was done with a book he tried to give it away to someone who would love it, and if he 
couldn't find a worthy recipient, he buried it, I looked for her all day but didn't see her, not 
in the yard, not through a window, I promised myself I would stay until I found her, but 


58 



as night began to come in, I knew I had to go home, I hated myself for going, why couldn't 
I be the kind of person who stays? I walked back with my head down, I couldn't stop 
thinking about her even though I hardly knew her, I didn't know what good would come 
of going to see her, but I knew that I needed to be near her, it occurred to me, as I walked 
back to her the next day with my head down, that she might not be thinking of me. The 
books had been buried, so I hid this time behind a group of trees, I imagined their roots 
wrapped around books, pulling nourishment from the pages, I imagined rings of letters in 
their trunks, I waited for hours, I saw your mother in one of the second-floor windows, 
she was just a girl, she looked back at me, but I didn't see Anna. A leaf fell, it was yellow 
like paper, I had to go home, and then, the next day, I had to go back to her. I skipped my 
classes, the walk happened so quickly, my neck strained from hiding my face, my arm 
brushed the arm of someone passing - a strong, solid arm - and I tried to imagine whom it 
belonged to, a farmer, a stoneworker, a carpenter, a bricklayer. When I got to her house I 
hid beneath one of the back windows, a train rattled past in the distance, people coming, 
people leaving, soldiers, children, the window shook like an eardrum, I waited all day, did 
she go on some sort of trip, was she on an errand, was she hiding from me? When I came 
home my father told me that her father had paid another visit, I asked him why he was out 
of breath, he said, 'Things keep getting worse,' I realized that her father and I must have 
passed each other on the road that morning. 'What things?' Was his the strong arm I felt 
brushing past me? 'Everything. The world.' Did he see me, or did my hat and lowered 
head protect me? 'Since when?' Perhaps his head was down, too. 'Since the beginning.' The 
harder I tried not to think about her, the more I thought about her, the more impossible it 
became to explain, I went back to her house, I walked the road between our two neighbor- 
hoods with my head down, she wasn't there again, I wanted to call her name, but I didn't 
want her to hear my voice, all of my desire was based on that one brief exchange, held in 
the palm of our half hour together were one hundred million arguments, and impossible 
admissions, and silences. I had so much to ask her, 'Do you like to lie on your stomach and 
look for things under the ice?' 

'Do you like plays?' 

'Do you like it when you can hear something before you can see it?' I went again the next 
day, the walk was exhausting, with each step I further convinced myself that she had 
thought badly of me, or worse, that she hadn't thought of me at all, I walked with my head 
bowed, my broad-brimmed cap pushed low, when you hide your face from the world, 
you can't see the world, and that's why, in the middle of my youth, in the middle of 
Europe, in between our two villages, on the verge of losing everything, I bumped into 
something and was knocked to the ground. It took me several breaths to gather myself to- 
gether, at first I thought I'd walked into a tree, but then that tree became a person, who 
was also recovering on the ground, and then I saw that it was her, and she saw that it was 
me, 'Hello,' I said, brushing myself off, 'Hello,' she said. "This is so funny.' 

'Yes.' How could it be explained? 'Where are you going?' I asked. 'Just for a walk,' she said, 
'and you?' 

'Just for a walk.' We helped each other up, she brushed leaves from my hair, I wanted to 
touch her hair, 'That's not true,' I said, not knowing what the next words out of my mouth 


59 



would be, but wanting them to be mine, wanting, more than I'd ever wanted anything, to 
express the center of me and be understood. 'I was walking to see you.' I told her, 'I've 
come to your house each of the last six days. For some reason I needed to see you again.' 
She was silent, I had made a fool of myself, there's nothing wrong with not understanding 
yourself and she started laughing, laughing harder than I'd ever felt anyone laugh, the 
laughter brought on tears, and the tears brought on more tears, and then I started laugh- 
ing, out of the most deep and complete shame, 'I was walking to you,' I said again, as if to 
push my nose into my own shit, 'because I wanted to see you again,' she laughed and 
laughed, 'That explains it,' she said when she was able to speak. 'It?' 

'That explains why, each of the last six days, you weren't at your house.' We stopped 
laughing, I took the world into me, rearranged it, and sent it back out as a question: 'Do 
you like me?' 

Do you know what time it is? 

Fie told me it's 9:38, he looked so much like me, I could tell that he saw it, too, we shared 
the smile of recognizing ourselves in each other, how many imposters do I have? Do we all 
make the same mistakes, or has one of us gotten it right, or even just a bit less wrong, am I 
the imposter? I just told myself the time, and I'm thinking of your mother, how young and 
old she is, how she carries around her money in an envelope, how she makes me wear 
suntan lotion no matter what the weather, how she sneezes and says, 'God bless me,' God 
bless her. She's at home now, writing her life story, she's typing while I'm leaving, un- 
aware of the chapters to come. It was my suggestion, and at the time I thought it was a 
very good one, I thought maybe if she could express herself rather than suffer herself, if 
she had a way to relieve the burden, she lived for nothing more than living, with nothing 
to get inspired by, to care for, to call her own, she helped out at the store, then came home 
and sat in her big chair and stared at her magazines, not at them but through them, she let 
the dust accumulate on her shoulders. I pulled my old typewriter from the closet and set 
her up in the guest room with everything she'd need, a card table for a desk, a chair, pa- 
per, some glasses, a pitcher of water, a hotplate, some flowers, crackers, it wasn't a proper 
office but it would do, she said, 'But it's a Nothing Place,' I wrote, 'What better place to 
write your life story?' She said, 'My eyes are crummy,' I told her they were good enough, 
she said, 'They barely work,' putting her fingers over them, but I knew she was just em- 
barrassed by the attention, she said, 'I don't know how to write,' I told her there's nothing 
to know, just let it come out, she put her hands on the typewriter, like a blind person feel- 
ing someone's face for the first time, and said, 'I've never used one of these before,' I told 
her, 'Just press the keys,' she said she would try, and though I'd known how to use a 
typewriter since I was a boy, trying was more than I ever could do. For months it was the 
same, she would wake up at 4 A.M. and go to the guest room, the animals would follow 
her, I would come here, I wouldn't see her again until breakfast, and then after work we'd 
go our separate ways and not see each other until it was time to fall asleep, was I worried 
about her, putting all of her life into her life story, no, I was so happy for her, I remem- 
bered the feeling she was feeling, the exhilaration of building the world anew, I heard 
from behind the door the sounds of creation, the letters pressing into the paper, the pages 
being pulled from the machine, everything being, for once, better than it was and as good 
as it could be, everything full of meaning, and then one morning this spring, after years of 


60 



working in solitude. She said, 'I'd like to show you something.' I followed her to the guest 
room, she pointed in the direction of the card table in the corner, on which the typewriter 
was wedged between two stacks of paper of about the same height, we walked over to- 
gether, she touched everything on the table and then handed me the stack on the left, she 
said, 'My Life.' 

'Excuse me?' I asked by shrugging my shoulders, she tapped the page, 'My Life,' she said 
again, I riffled the pages, there must have been a thousand of them, I put the stack down, 
'What is this?' I asked by putting her palms on the tops of my hands and then turning my 
palms upward, flipping her hands off mine, 'My Life,' she said, so proudly, 'I just made it 
up to the present moment. Just now. I'm all caught up with myself. The last thing I wrote 
was 'I'm going to show him what I've written. I hope he loves it.' I picked up the pages and 
wandered through them, trying to find the one on which she was born, her first love, 
when she last saw her parents, and I was looking for Anna, too, I searched and searched, I 
got a paper cut on my forefinger and bled a little flower onto the page on which I should 
have seen her kissing somebody, but this was all I saw: 

[3 empty pages] 

I wanted to cry but I didn't cry, I probably should have cried, I should have drowned us 
there in the room, ended our suffering, they would have found us floating face-down in 
two thousand white pages, or buried under the salt of my evaporated tears, I remembered, 
just then and far too late, that years before I had pulled the ribbon from the machine, it 
had been an act of revenge against the typewriter and against myself. I'd pulled it into one 
long thread, unwinding the negative it held - the future homes I had created for Anna, the 
letters I wrote without response - as if it would protect me from my actual life. But worse 
- it's unspeakable, write it! - 1 realized that your mother couldn't see the emptiness, she 
couldn't see anything. I knew that she'd had difficulty. I'd felt her grasp my arm when we 
walked. I'd heard her say, 'My eyes are crummy,' but I thought it was a way to touch me, 
another figure of speech, why didn't she ask for help, why, instead, did she ask for all of 
those magazines and papers if she couldn't see them, was that how she asked for help? 
Was that why she held so tightly to railings, why she wouldn't cook with me watching, or 
change her clothes with me watching, or open doors? Did she always have something to 
read in front of her so she wouldn't have to look at anything else? All of the words I'd 
written to her over all of those years, had I never said anything to her at all? 'Wonderful,' I 
told her by rubbing her shoulder in a certain way that we have between us, 'it's wonder- 
ful.’ 

'Go ahead,' she said, 'Tell me what you think.' I put her hand on the side of my face, I tilted 
my head toward my shoulder, in the context in which she thought our conversation was 
taking place that meant, 'I can't read it here like this. I'll take it to the bedroom, I'll read it 
slowly, carefully. I'll give your life story what it deserves.' But in what I knew to be the 
context of our conversation it meant, 'I have failed you.' 

Do you know what time it is? 

The first time Anna and I made love was behind her father's shed, the previous owner had 
been a farmer, but Dresden started to overtake the surrounding villages and the farm was 
divided into nine plots of land, Anna's family owned the largest. The walls of the shed col- 


61 



lapsed one autumn afternoon - 'a leaf too many,' her father joked - and the next day he 
made new walls of shelves, so that the books themselves would separate inside from out- 
side. (The new, overhanging roof protected the books from rain, but during the winter the 
pages would freeze together, come spring, they let out a sigh.) He made a little salon of the 
space, carpets, two small couches, he loved to go out there in the evenings with a glass of 
whiskey and a pipe, and take down books and look through the wall at the center of the 
city. He was an intellectual, although he wasn't important, maybe he would have been 
important if he had lived longer, maybe great books were coiled within him like springs, 
books that could have separated inside from outside. The day Anna and I made love for 
the first time, he met me in the yard, he was standing with a disheveled man whose curly 
hair sprang up in every direction, whose glasses were bent, whose white shirt was stained 
with the fingerprints of his print-stained hands, 'Thomas, please meet my friend Simon 
Goldberg.' I said hello, I didn't know who he was or why I was being introduced to him, I 
wanted to find Anna, Mr. Goldberg asked me what I did, his voice was handsome and 
broken, like a cobblestone street, I told him, 'I don't do anything,' he laughed, 'Don't be so 
modest,' Anna's father said. 'I want to be a sculptor.' Mr. Goldberg took off his glasses, un- 
tucked his shirt from his pants, and cleaned his lenses with his shirttail. 'You want to be a 
sculptor?' I said, 'I am trying to be a sculptor.' He put his glasses back on his face, pulling 
the wire earpieces behind his ears, and said, 'In your case, trying is being.' 

'What do you do?' I asked, in a voice more challenging than I'd wanted. He said, 'I don't 
do anything anymore.' Anna's father told him, 'Don't be so modest,' although he didn't 
laugh this time, and he told me, 'Simon is one of the great minds of our age.' 

'I'm trying,' Mr. Goldberg said to me, as if only the two of us existed. 'Trying what?' I 
asked, in a voice more concerned than I'd wanted, he took off his glasses again, 'Trying to 
be.' While her father and Mr. Goldberg spoke inside the makeshift salon, whose books 
separated inside from outside, Anna and I went for a walk over the reeds that lay across 
the gray-green clay by what once was a stall for horses, and down to where you could see 
the edge of the water if you knew where and how to look, we got mud halfway up our 
socks, and juice from the fallen fruit we kicked out of our way, from the top of the prop- 
erty we could see the busy train station, the commotion of the war grew nearer and nearer, 
soldiers went east through our town, and refugees went west, or stayed there, trains ar- 
rived and departed, hundreds of them, we ended where we began, outside the shed that 
was a salon. 'Let's sit down,' she said, we lowered ourselves to the ground, our backs 
against the shelves, we could hear them talking inside and smell the pipe smoke that 
seeped between the books, Anna started kissing me, 'But what if they come out?' I whis- 
pered, she touched my ears, which meant their voices would keep us safe. She put her 
hands all over me, I didn't know what she was doing, I touched every part of her, what 
was I doing, did we understand something that we couldn't explain? Her father said, 'You 
can stay for as long as you need. You can stay forever.' She pulled her shirt over her head, 

I held her breasts in my hands, it was awkward and it was natural, she pulled my shirt 
over my head, in the moment I couldn't see, Mr. Goldberg laughed and said, 'Forever,' I 
heard him pacing in the small room, I put my hand under her skirt, between her legs, eve- 
rything felt on the verge of bursting into flames, without any experience I knew what to 
do, it was exactly as it had been in my dreams, as if all the information had been coiled 


62 



within me like a spring, everything that was happening had happened before and would 
happen again, 'I don't recognize the world anymore,' Anna's father said, Anna rolled onto 
her back, behind a wall of books through which voices and pipe smoke escaped, 'I want to 
make love,' Anna whispered, I knew exactly what to do, night was arriving, trains were 
departing, I lifted her skirt, Mr. Goldberg said, 'I've never recognized it more,' and I could 
hear him breathing on the other side of the books, if he had taken one from the shelf he 
would have seen everything. But the books protected us. I was in her for only a second be- 
fore I burst into flames, she whimpered, Mr. Goldberg stomped his foot and let out a cry 
like a wounded animal, I asked her if she was upset, she shook her head no, I fell onto her, 
resting my cheek against her chest, and I saw your mother's face in the second-floor win- 
dow, "Then why are you crying?' I asked, exhausted and experienced, 'War!' Mr. Goldberg 
said, angry and defeated, his voice trembling: 'We go on killing each other to no purpose! 

It is war waged by humanity against humanity, and it will only end when there's no one 
left to fight!' She said, 'It hurt.' 

Do you know what time it is? 

Every morning before breakfast, and before I come here, your mother and I go to the guest 
room, the animals follow us, I thumb through the blank pages and gesture laughter and 
gesture tears, if she asks what I'm laughing or crying about, I tap my finger on the page, 
and if she asks, 'Why?' I press her hand against her heart, and then against my heart, or I 
touch her forefinger to the mirror, or touch it, quickly, against the hotplate, sometimes I 
wonder if she knows, I wonder in my Nothingest moments if she's testing me, if she types 
nonsense all day long, or types nothing at all, just to see what I'll do in response, she wants 
to know if I love her, that's all anyone wants from anyone else, not love itself but the 
knowledge that love is there, like new batteries in the flashlight in the emergency kit in the 
hall closet, 'Don't let anyone see it,' I told her that morning she first showed it to me, and 
maybe I was trying to protect her, and maybe I was trying to protect myself, 'We'll have it 
be our secret until it's perfect. We'll work on it together. We'll make it the greatest book 
anyone has ever written.' 

'You think that's possible?' she asked, outside, leaves fell from the trees, inside, we were 
letting go of our concern for that kind of truth, 'I do,' I said by touching her arm, 'If we try 
hard enough.’ She reached her hands in front of her and found my face, she said, Tm go- 
ing to write about this.’ Ever since that day I’ve been encouraging her, begging her, to 
write more, to shovel deeper, ’Describe his face,' I tell her, running my hand over the 
empty page, and then, the next morning, 'Describe his eyes,' and then, holding the page to 
the window, letting it fill with light, 'Describe his irises,' and then, 'His pupils.' She never 
asks, 'Whose?' She never asks, 'Why?' Are they my own eyes on those pages? I've seen the 
left stack double and quadruple. I've heard of asides that have become tangents that have 
become passages that have become chapters, and I know, because she told me, that what 
was once the second sentence is now the second-to-last. Just two days ago she said that her 
life story was happening faster than her life, 'What do you mean?' I asked with my hands, 
'So little happens,' she said, 'and I'm so good at remembering.' 

'You could write about the store?' 

'I've described every diamond in the case.' 


63 



'You could write about other people.' 

'My life story is the story of everyone I've ever met.' 

'You could write about your feelings.' She asked, 'Aren't my life and my feelings the same 
thing?' 

Excuse me, where do you get tickets? 

I have so much to tell you, the problem isn't that I'm running out of time. I'm running out 
of room, this book is filling up, there couldn't be enough pages, I looked around the 
apartment this morning for one last time and there was writing everywhere, filling the 
walls and mirrors. I'd rolled up the rugs so I could write on the floors. I'd written on the 
windows and around the bottles of wine we were given but never drank, I wear only short 
sleeves, even when it's cold, because my arms are books, too. But there's too much to ex- 
press. I'm sorry. That's what I've been trying to say to you. I'm sorry for everything. For 
having said goodbye to Anna when maybe I could have saved her and our idea, or at least 
died with them. I'm sorry for my inability to let the unimportant things go, for my inabil- 
ity to hold on to the important things. I'm sorry for what I'm about to do to your mother 
and to you. I'm sorry I'll never get to see your face, and feed you, and tell you bedtime sto- 
ries. I've tried in my own way to explain myself, but when I think of your mother's life 
story, I know that I haven't explained a thing, she and I are no different. I've been writing 
Nothing, too. "The dedication,' she said to me this morning, just a few hours ago, when I 
went to the guest room for the last time, 'Read it.' I touched my fingers to her eyelids and 
opened her eyes wide enough to convey every possible meaning, I was about to leave her 
behind without saying goodbye, to turn my back on a marriage of millimeters and rules, 
'Do you think it's too much?' she asked, bringing me back to her invisible dedication, I 
touched her with my right hand, not knowing to whom she had dedicated her life story, 
'It's not silly, is it?' I touched her with my right hand, and I was missing her already, I 
wasn't having second thoughts, but I was having thoughts, 'It's not vain?' I touched her 
with my right hand, and for all I knew she'd dedicated it to herself, 'Does it mean every- 
thing to you?' she asked, this time putting her finger on what wasn't there, I touched her 
with my left hand, and for all I knew she'd dedicated it to me. I told her that I had to get 
going. I asked her, with a long series of gestures that would have made no sense to anyone 
else, if she wanted anything special. 'You always get it right,' she said. 'Some nature maga- 
zines?' (I flapped her hands like wings.) 'That would be nice.' 

'Maybe something with art in it?' (I took her hand, like a brush, and painted an imaginary 
painting in front of us.) 'Sure.' She walked me to the door, as she always did, 'I might not 
be back before you fall asleep,' I told her, putting my open hand on her shoulder and then 
easing her cheek onto my palm. She said, 'But I can't fall asleep without you.' I held her 
hands against my head and nodded that she could, we walked to the door, navigating a 
Something path. 'And what if I can't fall asleep without you?' I held her hands against my 
head and nodded, 'And what if?' I nodded, 'Answer me what,' she said, I shrugged my 
shoulders, 'Promise me you'll take care,' she said, pulling the hood of my coat over my 
head, 'Promise me you'll take extra-special care. I know you look both ways before you 
cross the street, but I want you to look both ways a second time, because I told you to.' I 
nodded. She asked, 'Are you wearing lotion?' With my hands I told her, 'It's cold out. You 
have a cold.' She asked, 'But are you?' I surprised myself by touching her with my right 
hand. I could live a lie, but not bring myself to tell that small one. She said, 'Hold on,' and 
ran inside the apartment and came back with a bottle of lotion. She squeezed some into 
her hand, rubbed her hands together, and spread it on the back of my neck, and on the 
tops of my hands, and between my fingers, and on my nose and forehead and cheeks and 
chin, everything that was exposed, in the end I was the clay and she was the sculptor, I 
thought, it's a shame that we have to live, but it's a tragedy that we get to live only one life, 
because if I'd had two lives, I would have spent one of them with her. I would have stayed 
in the apartment with her, torn the blueprint from the door, held her on the bed, said, 'I 
want two rolls,' sang, 'Start spreading the news,' laughed, 'Ha ha ha!' cried, 'Help!' I would 
have spent that life among the living. We rode the elevator down together and walked to 
the threshold, she stopped and I kept going. I knew I was about to destroy what she'd 
been able to rebuild, but I had only one life. I heard her behind me. Because of myself, or 
despite myself, I turned back, 'Don't cry,' I told her, by putting her fingers on my face and 
pushing imaginary tears up my cheeks and back into my eyes, 'I know,' she said as she 
wiped the real tears from her cheeks, I stomped my feet, this meant, 'I won't go to the air- 
port.' 

'Go to the airport,' she said, I touched her chest, then pointed her hand out toward the 
world, then pointed her hand at her chest, 'I know,' she said, 'Of course I know that.' I held 
her hands and pretended we were behind an invisible wall, or behind the imaginary paint- 
ing, our palms exploring its surface, then, at the risk of saying too much, I held one of her 
hands over my eyes, and the other over her eyes, 'You are too good to me,' she said, I put 
her hands on my head and nodded yes, she laughed, I love it when she laughs, although 
the truth is I am not in love with her, she said, 'I love you,' I told her how I felt, this is how 
I told her: I held her hands out to her sides, I pointed her index fingers toward each other 
and slowly, very slowly, moved them in, the closer they got, the more slowly I moved 
them, and then, as they were about to touch, as they were only a dictionary page from 
touching, pressing on opposite sides of the word 'love,' I stopped them, I stopped them 
and held them there. I don't know what she thought, I don't know what she understood, 
or what she wouldn't allow herself to understand, I turned around and walked away from 
her, I didn't look back, I won't. I'm telling you all of this because I'll never be your father, 
and you will always be my child. I want you to know, at least, that it's not out of selfish- 
ness that I am leaving, how can I explain that? I can't live. I've tried and I can't. If that 
sounds simple, it's simple like a mountain is simple. Your mother suffered, too, but she 
chose to live, and lived, be her son and her husband. I don't expect that you'll ever under- 
stand me, much less forgive me, you might not even read these words, if your mother 
gives them to you at all. It's time to go. I want you to be happy, I want that more than I 
want happiness for myself, does that sound simple? I'm leaving. I'll rip these pages from 
this book, take them to the mailbox before I get on the plane, address the envelope to 'My 
Unborn Child,' and I'll never write another word again, I am gone, I am no longer here. 
With love. Your father 

I want to buy a ticket to Dresden. 

What are you doing here? 


You have to go home. You should be in bed. 

Let me take you home. 

You're being crazy. You're going to catch a cold. 
You're going to catch a colder. 

4/12/78 

To my child: I'm writing this from where your mother's father's shed used to stand, the 
shed is no longer here, no carpets cover no floors, no windows in no walls, everything has 
been replaced. This is a library now, that would have made your grandfather happy, as if 
all of his buried books were seeds, from each book came one hundred. I'm sitting at the 
end of a long table surrounded by encyclopedias, sometimes I take one down and read 
about other people's lives, kings, actresses, assassins, judges, anthropologists, tennis 
champions, tycoons, politicians, just because you haven't received any letters from me 
don't think I haven't written any. Every day I write a letter to you. Sometimes I think if I 
could tell you what happened to me that night, I could leave that night behind me, maybe 
I could come home to you, but that night has no beginning or end, it started before I was 
born and it's still happening. I'm writing in Dresden, and 

your mother is writing in the Nothing guest room, or I assume she is, I hope she is, some- 
times my hand starts to burn and I am convinced we are writing the same word at the 
same moment. Anna gave me the typewriter your mother used to write her life story on. 
She gave it to me only a few weeks before the bombings, I thanked her, she said, 'Why are 
you thanking me? It's a gift for me.' 

'A gift for you?' 

'You never write to me.' 

'But I'm with you.' 


113 



'So?' 

'You write to someone you can't be with.' 

'You never sculpt me, but at least you could write to me.' It's the tragedy of loving, you 
can't love anything more than something you miss. I told her, 'You never write to me.' She 
said, 'You've never given me a typewriter.' I started to invent future homes for us. I'd type 
through the night and give them to her the next day. I imagined dozens of homes, some 
were magical (a clock tower with a stopped clock in a city where time stood still), some 
were mundane (a bourgois estate in the country with rose gardens and peacocks), each felt 
possible and perfec 

t, wonder if your mother ever saw them. 'Dear Anna, We will live in a home built at the 
top of the world's tallest ladder.' 

'Dear Anna, We will live in a cave in a hillside in Turkey.' 

'Dear Anna, We will live in a home with no walls, so that everywhere we go will be our 
home.' I wasn't trying to invent better and better homes, but to show her that homes didn't 
matter, we could live in any home, in any city, in any country, in any century, and be 
happy, as if the world were just what we lived in. The night before I lost everything, I 
typed our last future home: 'Dear Anna, We will live in a series of homes, which will climb 
the Alps and we'll never sleep in the same one twice. Each morning after breakfast, we'll 
sled down to the next home. And when we open its front door, the previous home will be 
destroyed and rebuilt as a new home. When we get to the bottom, we'll take a lift to the 
top and start again at the beginning.' I went to bring it to her the next day, on my way to 
your mothers house, I heard a noise from the shed, from where I'm now writing this to 
you, I suspected it was Simon Goldberg. I knew that Anna's father had been hiding him, I 
had heard them talking in there some nights when Anna and I tiptoed into the fields, they 
were always whispering, I had seen his charcoal stained shirt on their clothesline. I didn't 
want to make myself known, so I quietly slid a book from the wall. Anna's father, your 
grandfather, was sitting in his chair with his face in his hands, he was my hero. When I 
think back on that moment, I never see him with his face in his hands, I won't let myself 
see him that way, I see the book in my hands, it was an illustrated edition of Qvid's Meta- 
morphosis, used to look for the edition in the States, as if by finding it I could slide it back 
in the shed's wall, block the image of my hero's face in his hands, stop my life and history 
at that moment, I asked after it in every bookshop in New York, but I never was able to 
find flight poured into the room through the hole in the wall, your grandfather lifted his 
head, he came to the shelf and we looked at each other through the missing Metamorpho- 
sis, I asked him if something was wrong, he didn't say anything, I could see only a sliver 
of his face, the spine of a book of his face, looked at each other until it felt like everything 
would burst into flames, 

it was the silence of my life. I found Anna in her room, 'Hi.' 

'Hi.' 

'I just saw your father?' 

'In the shed?' 

'He seems upset.' 


114 



'He doesn't want to be part of it anymore.' I told her, 'It will all be over soon.' 

'How do you know?' 

'Everyone says so.' 

'Everyone has always been wrong.' 

'It will be over, and life will go back to how it was.' She said, 'Don't be a child.' 

'Don't turn away from me.' She wouldn't look at me. I asked, 'What's happened?' I'd never 
seen her cry before. I told her, 'Don't cry.' She said, 'Don't touch me.' I asked, 'What is it?' 
She said, 'Will you please shut up!' We sat on her bed in silence. The silence pressed down 
on us like a hand. I said, 'Whatever it is - ' She said 'I'm pregnant.' I can't write what we 
said to each other then. Before I left, she said, 'Please be overjoyed.' I told her I was, of 
course I was, I kissed her, I kissed her stomach, that was the last time I ever saw her. At 
9:30 that night, the air-raid sirens sounded, everyone went to the shelters, but no one hur- 
ried, we were use to the alarms, we assumed they were false, why would anyone want to 
bomb Dresden? The families on our street turned off the lights in their houses and filed 
into the shelter, waited on the steps, I was thinking of Anna. It was silent and still and I 
couldn't see my own hands in the darkness. One hundred planes flew overhead, massive, 
heavy planes, pushing through the night like one hundred whales through water, they 
dropped clusters of red flares to light up the blackness for whatever was to come next, I 
was alone on the street, the red flares fell around me, thousands of them, knew that some- 
thing unimaginable was about to happen, was thinking of Anna, I was overjoyed. I ran 
downstairs four steps at a time, they saw the look on my face, before I had time to say any- 
thing - what would I have said? - we heard a horrible noise, rapid, approaching explo- 
sions, like an applauding audience running toward us, then they were atop us, we were 
thrown to the corners, our cellar filled with fire and smoke, more powerful explosions, the 
walls lifted from the floor and separated just long enough to let light flood in before bang- 
ing back to the ground, orange and blue explosions, violet and white, I later read that the 
first bombing lasted less than half an hour, but it felt like days and weeks, like the world 
was going to end, the bombing stopped as matter of factly as it had 

began, ' Are you OK?' 

'Are you OK?' 

'Are you OK?' We ran out of the cellar, which was flooded with yellow-gray smoke, we 
didn't recognize anything, I had been on the stoop just half an hour before, and now there 
was no stoop in front of no house on no street, only fire in every direction, all that re- 
mained of our house was a patch of the facade that stubbornly held up the front door, a 
horse on fire galloped past, there were burning vehicles and carts with burning refugies, 
people were screaming, I told my parents I had to go find Anna, my mother told me to 
stay with them, I said I would meet them back at our front door, my father begged me to 
stay, I grabbed the doorknob and it took the skin off my hand, I saw the muscles of my 
palm, red and pulsing, why did I grab it with my other hand? My father shouted at me, it 
was the first time he had ever shouted at me, I can't write what he shouted, I told them I 
would meet them back at our door, he struck me across the face, it was the first time he 
had ever struck me, that was the last time I saw my parents. On my way to Anna's house, 
the second raid began, threw myself into the nearest cellar, it was hit, it filled with pink 


115 



smoke and gold flames, so I fled into the next cellar, caught fire, I ran from cellar to cellar 
as each previous cellar was destroyed, burning monkeys screamed from the trees, birds 
with their wings on fire sang from the telephone wires over which desperate calls trav- 
eled, found another shelter, it was filled to the walls, brown smoke pressed down from the 
ceiling like a hand, became more and more difficult to breathe, my lungs were trying to 
pull the room in through my mouth, there was a silver explosion, all of us tried to leave 
the cellar at once, dead and dying people were trampled, I walked over an old man, I 
walked over children, everyone was losing everyone, the bombs were like a waterfall, I 
ran through the streets, from cellar to cellar, and saw terrible things: legs and necks, I saw 
a woman whose blond hair and green dress were on fire, running with a silent baby in her 
arms, I saw humans melted into thick pools of liquid, three or four feet deep in places, I 
saw bodies crackling like embers, laughing, and the remains of masses of people who had 
tried to escape the firestorm by jumping head first into the lakes and ponds, the parts of 
their bodies that were submerged in the water were still intact, while the parts that pro- 
truded above water were charred beyond recognition, the bombs kept falling, purple, or- 
ange and white, I kept running, my hands kept bleeding, through the sounds of collapsing 
buildings I heard the roar of that baby's silence. I passed the zoo, the cages had been 
ripped open, everything was everywhere, dazed animals cried in pain and confusion, one 
of the keepers was calling out for help, he was a strong man, his eyes had been burnt 
closed, he grabbed my arm and asked me if I knew how to fire a gun, I told him I had to 
get to someone, he handed me his rifle and said, 'You've got to find the carnivores,' I told 
him I wasn't a good shot, I told him I didn't know which were carnivores and which 
weren't, he said, 'Shoot everything,' I don't know how many animals I killed, I killed an 
elephant, it had been thrown twenty yards from its cage, I pressed the rifle to the back of 
its head and wondered, as I squeezed the trigger. Is it necessary to kill this animal? I killed 
an ape that was perched on the stump of a fallen tree, pulling its hair as it surveyed the 
destruction, I killed two lions, they were standing side by side facing west, were they re- 
lated, were they friends, mates, can lions love? I killed a cub that was climbing atop a mas- 
sive dead bear, as it climbing atop its parent? I killed a camel with twelve bullets, I sus- 
pected it wasn't a carnivore, but I was killing everything, everything had to be killed, a 
rhinoceros was banging its head against a rock, again and again, as if to put itself out of its 
suffering, or to make itself suffer, I fired at it, it kept banging its head, I fired again, it 
banged harder, I walked up to it and pressed the gun between its eyes, I killed it, I killed a 
zebra, I killed a giraffe, I turned the water of the sea lion's tank red, an ape approached me, 
it was the ape I had shot before, I'd thought I'd killed it, it walked up to me slowly, its 
hands covering its ears, what did it want from me, I screamed, 'What do you want from 
me?' I shot it again, where I thought its heart was, it looked at me, in its eyes I was sure I 
saw some form of understandings, but I didn't see forgiveness, I tried to shoot the vul- 
tures, but I wasn't a good enough shot, later I saw vultures fattening themselves on the 
human carnage, and I blamed myself for everything. The second bombing halted as sud- 
denly and totally as it had began, with burnt hair, with black arms and black fingers, I 
walked, dazed, to the base of the Loschwitz Bridge, I submerged my black hands in the 
black water and saw my reflection, I was terrified of my own image, my blood-matted 
hair, my split and bleeding lips, my red, pulsing palms, which, even as I write this, thirty- 


116 



five years later, don't look like they should be at the ends of my arms. I remember losing 
my balance, I remember a single thought in my head: Keep thinking. As long as I am think- 
ing, I am alive, but at some point I stopped thinking,, the next thing I remember is feeling 
terribly cold, I realized I was lying on the ground, the pain was complete, it let me know I 
hadn't died, started moving my legs and arms, my movements must have been noticed by 
one of the soldiers that had been put into action all over the city, looking for survivors, I 
later learned that there had been more than 220 bodies taken from the foot of the bridge, 
and 4 came back to life, I was one of them. They loaded us onto trucks and took us out of 
Dresden, I looked out from the flaps of canvas that covered the sides of the truck, the 
buildings were burning, the trees burning, the asphalt, I saw and heard humans trapped, I 
smelled them, standing in the moltin, burning streets like living torches, screaming for 
help that was impossible to give, the air itself was burning, the truck had to make a num- 
ber of detours to get beyond the chaos, planes bore down on us once more, we were 
pulled off the truck and placed under it, the planes dove, more machine guns, more 
bombs, yellow, red, green, blue, brown, I lost consciousness again, when I awoke I was in 
a white hospital bed, I couldn't move my arms or legs, I wondered if I had lost them, but I 
couldn't summon the energy to look for myself, hours passed, or days, when I finally 
looked down, I saw that I was strapped to the bed, a nurse was standing beside me, I 
asked, 'Why have you done this to me?' She told me I had been trying to hurt myself, I 
asked her to free me, she said she couldn't, she said I would hurt myself, I begged her to 
free me, I told her I wouldn't hurt myself, I promised, she apologized and touched me, 
doctors operated on me, they gave me injections and bandaged my body, but it was her 
touching that saved my life. In the days and weeks after my release, I looked for my par- 
ents and for Anna and for you. Everyone was looking for everyone in the rubble of every 
building, but all of the searching was in vain, I found our old house, the door was still 
stubbornly standing, a few of our belongings survived, the typewriter survived, I carried it 
in my arms like a baby,, before I was evacuated I wrote on the door that I was alive, and 
the address of the refugee camp in Oschatz, I waited for a letter, but no letter ever came. 
Because there were so many bodies, and because so many of the bodies had been de- 
stroyed there was never a list of the dead, thousands of people were left to suffer hope. 
When I had thought I was dying at the base of the Loschwitz Bridge, there was a single 
thought in my head: Keep thinking. Thinking would keep me alive. But now I am alive, and 
thinking is killing me. I think and think and think. I can't stop thinking about that night, 
the clusters of red flares, the sky that was like black water, and how only hours before I 
lost everything, I had everything. Your aunt had told me she was pregnant, I was over- 
joyed, I should have known not to trust it, one hundred years joy can be erased in one sec- 
ond, I kissed her belly, even though there was nothing yet to kiss, told her, 'I love our 
baby.' That made her laugh, I hadn't heard her laugh like that since the day we walked 
into each other halfway between our houses, she said, 

'You love an idea.' I told her, 'I love our idea.' That was the point, we were having an idea 
together. She asked, 'Are you afraid?' 

'Afraid of what?' She said, 'Life is scarier than death.' I took the future home from my 
pocket and gave it to her, I kissed her, I kissed her stomach, that was the last time I ever 
saw her. I was at the end of the path when I heard her father. He came out of the shed. 'I 


117 



almost forgot!' he called to me. 'There's a letter here for you. It was delivered yesterday. I 
almost forgot.' He ran into the house and came back out with an envelope. 'I almost for- 
got,' he said, his eyes were red, his knuckles were white, I later learned that he survived 
the bombing and then killed himself. Did your mother tell you that? Does she know it her- 
self? He handed a letter to me. it was from Simon Goldberg. The letter had been posted 
from Westerbork transit camp in Holland, that's where the Jews from our region were 
sent, from there they went either to work or to their deaths. 'Dear Thomas Schell, It was a 
pleasure meeting you, however briefly. For reasons that need not be explained, you made 
a strong impression on me. It is my great hope that our paths, however long and winding, 
will cross again. Until that day, I wish the best for you in these difficult times. Yours most 
sincerely, Simon Goldberg.' I put the letter back in the envelope and the envelope in my 
pocket, where the future home had been, I heard your grandfather's voice as I walked 
away, he was still at the door, 'I almost forgot' When your mother found me in the bakery 
on Broadway I wanted to tell her everything, maybe if I'd been able to, we could have 
lived differently, maybe I'd be there with you now instead of here. Maybe if I had said, 'I 
lost a baby,' if I'd said, 'I'm so afraid of losing something I love that I refuse to love any- 
thing,' maybe that would have made the impossible possible. Maybe, but I couldn't do it, I 
had buried too much too deeply inside me. And here I am instead of there. I'm sitting in 
this library, thousands of miles from my life writing another letter 

I know I won't be able to send, no matter how hard I try and how much I want to. How 
did that boy making love behind that shed become this man writing this letter at this ta- 
ble? 

I love you. 

Your father 

WHY I'M NOT WHERE YOU ARE 


9/11/03 


I don't speak. I'm sorry. 

My name is Thomas. 

I'm sorry. 

I'm still sorry. 

To my child: I wrote my last letter on the day you died, and I assumed I'd never write an- 
other word to you. I've been so wrong about so much that I've assumed, why am I sur- 
prised to feel the pen in my hand tonight? I'm writing as I wait to meet Oskar, in a little 
less than an hour. I'll close this book and find him under the streetlight, we'll be on our 
way to the cemetery, to you, your father and your son, this is how it happened. I gave a 
note to your mother's doorman almost two years ago. I watched from across the street as 
the limousine pulled up, she got out, she touched the door, she'd changed so much but I 
still knew her, her hands had changed but the way she touched was the same, she went 
into the building with a boy, I couldn't see if the doorman gave her my note, I couldn't see 
her reaction, the boy came out and went into the building across the street. I watched her 
that night as she stood with her palms against the window, I left another note with the 
doorman, 'Do you want to see me again, or should I go away?' The next morning there 
was a note written on the window, 'Don't go away,' which meant something, but it didn't 
mean 'I want to see you again.' I gathered a handful of pebbles and tossed them at her 
window, nothing happened, I tossed some more, but she didn't come to the window, I 
wrote a note in my daybook - 'Do you want to see me again?' - 1 ripped it out and gave it 
to the doorman, the next morning I went back, I didn't want to make her life any harder 
than it was, but I didn't want to give up either, there was a note on the window, 'I don't 
want to want to see you again,' which meant something, but it didn't mean yes. I gathered 


149 



pebbles from the street and threw them at her window, hoping she would hear me and 
know what I meant, I waited, she didn't come to the window, I wrote a note - 'What 
should I do?' - and gave it to the doorman, he said, 'I'll make sure she gets it,' I couldn't 
say, 'Thank you.' The next morning I went back, there was a note on her window, the first 
note, 'Don't go away,' I gathered pebbles, I threw them, they tapped like fingers against 
the glass, I wrote a note, 'Yes or no?' for how long could it go on? The next day I found a 
market on Broadway and bought an apple, if she didn't want me I would leave, I didn't 
know where I would go, but I would turn around and walk away, there was no note on 
her window, so I threw the apple, anticipating the glass that would rain down on me, I 
wasn't afraid of the shards, the apple went through her window and into her apartment, 
the doorman was standing in front of the building, he said, 'You're lucky that was open, 
pal,' but I knew I wasn't lucky, he handed me a key. I rode the elevator up, the door was 
open, the smell brought back to me what for forty years I had struggled not to remember 
but couldn't forget. I put the key in my pocket, 'Only the guest room!' she called from our 
bedroom, the room in which we used to sleep and dream and make love. That was how 

~ /V /V, 

we began our second life together A <t A€A ! When I got off the plane, after eleven hours of 
travel and forty years away, the man took my passport and asked me the purpose of my 
visit, I wrote in my daybook, 'To mourn,' and then, 'To mourn 

try to live,' he gave me a look and asked if I would consider that business or pleasure, I 
wrote, 'Neither.' 

'For how long do you plan to mourn and try to live?' I wrote, 'For the rest of my life.' 

'So you're going to stay?' 

'For as long as I can.' 

'Are we talking about a weekend or a year?' I didn't write anything. The man said, 'Next.' I 
watched the bags go around the carousel, each one held a person's belongings, I saw ba- 
bies going around and around, possible lives, I followed the arrows for those with nothing 
to declare, and that made me want to laugh, but I was silent. One of the guards asked me 
to come to the side, 'That's a lot of suitcases for someone with nothing to declare,' he said, I 
nodded, knowing that people with nothing to declare carry the most, I opened the suit- 
cases for him, 'That's a lot of paper,' he said, I showed him my left palm, 'I mean, that's a 
whole lot of paper.' I wrote, 'They're letters to my son. I wasn't able to send them to him 
while he was alive. Now he's dead. I don't speak. I'm sorry.' The guard looked at the other 
guard and they shared a smile, I don't mind if smiles come at my expense, I'm a small 
price to pay, they let me through, not because they believed me but because they didn't 
want to try to understand me, I found a pay phone and called your mother, that was as far 
as my plan went, I assumed so much, that she was still alive, that she was in the same 
apartment I'd left forty years before, I assumed she would come pick me up and every- 
thing would begin to make sense, we would mourn and try to live, the phone rang and 
rang, we would forgive ourselves, it rang, a woman answered, 'Hello?' I knew it was her, 
the voice had changed but the breath was the same, the spaces between the words were 
the same, I pressed '4, 3, 5, 5, 6,' she said, 'Hello?' I asked, '4, 7, 4, 8, 7, 3, 2, 5, 5, 9, 9, 6, 8?' 
She said, 'Your phone isn't one hundred dollars. Hello?' I wanted to reach my hand 
through the mouthpiece, down the line, and into her room, I wanted to reach YES, I asked. 


150 



'4, 7,4,8, 7, 3, 2, 5, 5,9,9,6, 8?’ She said, 'Hello?' I told her, '4, 3, 5, 7!’ 

'Listen,' she said, 'I don't know what's wrong with your phone, but all I hear is beeps. Why 
don't you hang up and try again.' Try again? I was trying to try again, that's what I was 
doing! I knew it wouldn't help, I knew no good would come of it, but I stood there in the 
middle of the airport, at the beginning of the century, at the end of my life, and I told her 
everything: why I'd left, where I'd gone, how I'd found out about your death, why I'd 
come back, and what I needed to do with the time I had left. I told her because I wanted 
her to believe me and understand, and because I thought I owed it to her, and to myself, 
and to you, or was it just more selfishness? I broke my life down into letters, for love I 
pressed '5, 6, 8, 3,' for death, '3, 3, 2, 8, 4,' when the suffering is subtracted from the joy, 
what remains? What, I wondered, is the sum of my life? '6,9,6, 2, 6, 3,4, 7, 3, 5,4, 3, 2, 5, 8, 6, 

2, 6, 3,4, 5, 8, 7, 8, 2, 7, 7,4, 8, 3, 3. 2 8, 8,4, 3, 2,4, 7, 7, 6, 7, 8, 4, 6, 3, 3, 3, 8, 6, 3,4, 6, 3, 6, 7, 3,4, 

6, 5, 3, 5, 7! 6,4, 3,2,2, 6, 7,4, 2, 5, 6, 3, 8, 7, 2, 6, 3,4, 3? 5, 7, 6, 3, 5, 8,6, 2, 6 3.4. 5. 8. 7.8, 2, 7, 
7,4,8, 3, 9, 2, 8, 8,4, 3, 2,4, 7, 7,6, 7,8,4,6, 3, 3, 4. 5, 7, 6, 7, 8,4, 6, 3, 5, 5, 2, 6, 9, 4, 6, 5, 6, 7, 5, 4, 
6! 5, 2, 6, 2, 6, 5, 9, 5, 2? 6, 9,6, 2, 6, 5,4, 7, 5, 5,4, 5, 2, 5, 2, 6,4, 6, 2,4, 5, 2, 7, 2, 2, 7, 7,4, 2, 5. 5, 

2, 9, 2, 4, 5, 2,6! 4, 2, 2, 6, 5,4, 2, 5, 7,4, 5, 2, 5, 2,6, 2, 6, 5, 4, 5, 2, 7,2, 2, 7, 7,4, 2, 5, 5, 2, 2, 2,4, 5, 

2! 7, 2, 2, 7, 7,4, 2, 5, 5, 2, 2, 2,4, 5, 2, 4, 7, 2, 2, 7, 2,4, 6, 5, 5, 5, 2, 6, 5,4, 6, 5, 6, 7, 5,4! 4, 3, 2, 4, 

3, 3, 6, 3, 8, 4! 6, 3, 3, 3, 8,6, 3, 9, 6, 3, 6, 6, 3, 4, 6, 5, 3, 5, 3! 2, 2, 3, 3, 2,6, 3,4, 2, 5, 6, 3,8, 3, 2,6, 

3.4, 3? 5,6, 8, 3? 5, 3,6, 3, 5, 8, 6, 2, 6, 3,4, 5, 8, 3, 8, 2, 3, 4, 8, 3, 3, 2, 8! 3, 3,4, 8, 3, 3, 2- 8, 3,4- 3. 

2.4, 7, 6, 6, 7, 8,4, 6, 8, 3, 8, 8, 6, 3,4, 6, 3! 2, 2, 7, 7,4, 2, 5, 5, 2, 9, 2,4, 5, 2,6! 4, 2, 2,6, 5,4, 2, 5, 

7.4, 5. 6, 5, 5, 2, 6, 2, 6, 3, 4, 5, 8, 3, 8, 2, 3, 3, 4, 8, 3, 9, 2, 8, 8, 4, 3, 2,4, 3, 3, 6. 3- 8, 4, 6, 3, 3, 3, 

8! 4, 3, 2,4, 3, 3, 6, 3, 8, 4! 6, 3, 3, 3, 8, 6, 3, 9, 6, 3, 6, 6, 3,4, 6, 5, 3, 5, 3! 2, 2, 3, 3, 2, 6, 3,4, 2, 5, 6, 

3, 8, 3, 2, 6, 3,4, 3? 5, 6, 8, 3? 5. 3. 6. 3. S 8,6, 2, 6, 3,4, 5, 8, 3, 8, 2, 3, 3,4, -8, 3, 3, 2, 8! 2, 7, 2,4, 6, 
5. 5- 5. 2 6, 5, 4, 6, 5, 6, 7, 5,4! 6, 5, 5, 5, 7! 6, 4, 5, 2, 2, 6, 7, 4, 2, 5, 6, 5, 2, 6! 2, 6, 5,4, 5? 5, 7, 6, 

5, 5, 2, 6, 2, 6, 5,4, 5, 2, 7, 2, 2, 7, 7,4, 2, 5, 9, 2, 2, 2,4, 5, 2,4, 5, 5, 6, 5, 2,4,6, 5, 5, 5, 2! 4, 5, 2,4, 5, 

5.6, 5! 5, 6, 8, 3? 5, 5. 6, 5, 5, 2, 6, 2, 6, 3,4, 5, 8, 3, 8, 2, 3, 3,4, 8, 3, 9, 2, 8, 8,4, 3, 2,4, 3,4, 6. 5, 
5,5,2! 4, 5, 2,4, 5, 5, 6, 5! 6, 5,4, 5? 4, 5? 5, 5, 6, 5, 5, 2, 6, 2,6, 3,4, 5, 8, 3, 8, 2, 3, 3,4, 8, 3, 9, 2, 8, 

8.4, 3, 2,4, 3, 3, 6, 3, 8,4,6, 3, 3, 3, 8! 4, 3, 2,4, 3, 3, 6, 3, 8,4! 6, 3, 3, 3, 6, 7,4, 2, 5, 6, 3, 8, 7, 2, 6, 

3.4, 3? 5, 7, 6, 3. 5, 8, 6, 2, 6, 3,4, 5, 8, 7, 8, 2, 7, 7,4, 8, 3, 3, 2, 8! 7, 7,4, 8, 3, 3, 2, 8, 3, 4. 3. 2- 4- 7. 

6, 6- 7. 8,4, 6, 8, 3, 8, 8, 6, 3,4, 6, 3, 6, 7, 3,4, 6, 7, 7, 4, 8, 3, 3, 9, 8, 8,4, 3, 2,4, 5, 7, 6, 7, 8,4, 6, 3, 

5, 5, 2, 6, 9,4, 6, 5, 6, 7, 5,4, 6! 5, 4,5,2,7,2, 2,7,7,4,2, 5, 5, 2, 2,2,4, 5,2! 7,2, 2, 7, 7,4,2,5, 5,2, 2, 2,4, 
5, 2,4, 7, 2, 2, 7, 2,4,6, 5, 5,5,2,6, 5,4,6, 5, 6, 7, 5,4! 6, 5, 5, 5, 7! 6, 4, 5, 2, 2,6, 7,4, 2, 5,6, 5, 2,6! 

2.6, 5,4, 5? 5, 7,6, 5, 5, 2,6, 2,6, 5,4, 5, 2, 7,2,2,7,7,4,2,5,9,2, 2,2,4, 5,2,4! 5,6,8,3? 5,5,6, 
5,2,4,6,5,5,5,21 4. 5.2.4. 5. 5.6. 5! 8,6, 3,9,6, 3,6,6, 3,4,6, 5, 3, 5, 3, 2, 2, 3,3,2,6, 3,4, 2, 5,6, 3, 8, 3, 

2, 6, 3,4, 3? 5, 6, 8, 3? 5, 3, 6, 3, 5, 8, 6, 2, 6, 3,4, 5, 8, 3, 8, 2,3,3,4. 8, 3. 3. 2,8! 3, 3,4,8, 3, 3, 2, 8, 

3.4, 3, 2,4, 7,6,6, 7, 8,4,6, 8, 3, 8,8,6, 3,4,6, 3! 2, 2, 7, 7,4,6, 7,4, 2, 5,6, 3,8, 7, 2,6, 3,4, 3? 5, 7,6, 3, 

5, 8,6, 2,6, 3,4, 5, 8, 7,8, 2, 7, 7,4, 8, 3, 3, 2,8! 7, 7,4, 8, 3, 3, 2,8, 3,4, 3, 2, 4, 7,6,6, 7,8,4,6,8, 3,8, 

8.6, 3,4,6, 3,6, 7, 3,4,6, 7, 7,4, 8, 3, 3,9, 8,8, 4. 3.2,4’ 5. 7.6.7.8,4.6 3.5.5 2,6,9,4,6,5,6, 7, 5,4, 6! 5, 
2,6,2,6,5, 9, 5, 2? 6, 9,6, 2,6, 5,4, 7, 5, 5,4, 5, 2,5,2,6,4,6, 2,4, 5, 2, 7, 2, 2, 7, 7,4, 2, 5, 5, 2,9, 2,4, 5, 
2,6! 4, 2, 2,6, 5,4, 2, 5, 7,4, 5, 2, 5, 2,6, 2,6, 5,4, 5, 2, 7.2, 2,7,7,4, 2,5, 5, 2, 2,2,4,5, 2! 7, 2, 2, 

7, 7,4,2, 5, 5,2,2, 2,4, 5,2,4, 7. 2, 2, 7, 2,4,6, 5, 5,5,2,6, 5,4,6, 5,6, 7, 5,4! 6, 5, 5, 5, 7! 6,4, 5, 2, 2,6, 

7.4, 2,5,6, 5, 2,6! 2,6, 5,4, 5? 5, 7,6, 5, 5, 2,6, 2,6, 5,4, 5, 2, 7, 2, 2, 7, 7, 4. 2. 5. 9. 2. 2, 2,4, 5, 2,4! 5, 

6, 8, 3? 5, 5, 6, 5, 2,4, 6, 5, 5, 5, 2! 4, 5, 2,4, 5. 5.6 5! 2.5. S. 2,9.2,4.5.2,61 4,2,2,6,5,4,21 5,5,6,5,5, 

2.6, 2,6, 3, 4. 5.8. 3 8, 2, 3, 3,4,8, 3, 9, 2, 8, 8,4, 3,2,4, 3, 3,6, 3, 8,4, 6, 3, 3, 3,8! 4, 3.2.4. 3. 3.6. 3.8,4! 


151 



It took me a long time, I don't know how long, minutes, hours, my heart got tired, my fin- 
ger did, I was trying to destroy the wall between me and my life with my finger, one press 
at a time, my quarter ran out, or she hung up, I called again, '4, 7,4, 8, 7, 3, 2, 5, 5,9, 9,6, 8?' 
She said, 'Is this a joke?' A joke, it wasn't a joke, what is a joke, was it a joke? She hung up, 

I called again, '8, 4, 4, 7, 4, 7, 6, 6, 8, 2, 5, 6, 5, 3!' She asked, 'Oskar?' That was the first time I 

~ a, a 

ever heard his name Act A€A ! I was in Dresden's train station when I lost everything for the 
second time, I was writing you a letter that I knew I never would send, sometimes I wrote 
from there, sometimes from here, sometimes from the zoo, I didn't care about anything ex- 
cept for the letter I was writing to you, nothing else existed, it was like when I walked to 
Anna with my head down, hiding myself from the world, which is why I walked into her, 
and why I didn't notice that people were gathering around the televisions. It wasn't until 
the second plane hit, and someone who didn't mean to holler hollered, that I looked up, 
there were hundreds of people around the televisions now, where had they come from? I 
stood up and looked, I didn't understand what I was seeing on the screen, was it a com- 
mercial, a new movie? I wrote, 'What's happened?' and showed it to a young businessman 
watching the television, he took a sip of his coffee and said, 'No one knows yet,' his coffee 
haunts me, his 'yet' haunts me. I stood there, a person in a crowd, was I watching the im- 
ages, or was something more complicated happening? I tried to count the floors above 
where the planes had hit, the fire had to burn up through the buildings, I knew that those 
people couldn't be saved, and how many were on the planes, and how many were on the 
street, I thought and thought. On my walk home I stopped in front of an electronics store, 
the front window was a grid of televisions, all but one of them were showing the build- 
ings, the same images over and over, as if the world itself were repeating, a crowd had 
gathered on the sidewalk, one television, off to the side, was showing a nature program, a 
lion was eating a flamingo, the crowd became noisy, someone who didn't mean to holler 
hollered, pink feathers, I looked at one of the other televisions and there was only one 
building, one hundred ceilings had become one hundred floors, which had become noth- 
ing, I was the only one who could believe it, the sky was filled with paper, pink feathers. 
The cafes were full that afternoon, people were laughing, there were lines in front of the 
movie theaters, they were going to see comedies, the world is so big and small, in the same 
moment we were close and far. In the days and weeks that followed, I read the lists of the 
dead in the paper: mother of three, college sophomore, Yankees fan, lawyer, brother, bond 
trader, weekend magician, practical joker, sister, philanthropist, middle son, dog lover, 
janitor, only child, entrepreneur, waitress, grandfather of fourteen, registered nurse, ac- 



countant, intern, jazz saxophonist, doting uncle, army reservist, late-night poet, sister, 
window washer. Scrabble player, volunteer fireman, father, father, elevator repairman, 
wine aficionado, office manager, secretary, cook, financier, executive vice president, bird 
watcher, father, dishwasher, Vietnam veteran, new mother, avid reader, only child, com- 
petitive chess player, soccer coach, brother, analyst, maitre d', black belt, CEO, bridge 
partner, architect, plumber, public relations executive, father, artist in residence, urban 
planner, newlywed, investment banker, chef, electrical engineer, new father who had a 
cold that morning and thought about calling in sickActA€A ! and then one day I saw it, 
Thomas Schell, my first thought was that I had died. 'He leaves behind a wife and son,' I 

thought, my son, I thought, my grandson, I thought and thought and thought, and then I 

~ /\ /*. 

stopped thinkingAct A€A ! When the plane descended and I saw Manhattan for the first 
time in forty years, I didn't know if I was going up or down, the lights were stars, I didn't 
recognize any of the buildings, I told the man, 'To mourn 

try to live,' I declared nothing, I called your mother but I couldn't explain myself, I called 
again, she thought it was a joke, I called again, she asked, 'Oskar?' I went to the magazine 
stand and got more quarters, I tried again, it rang and rang, I tried again, it rang, I waited 
and tried again, I sat on the ground, not knowing what would happen next, not even 
knowing what I wanted to happen next, I tried once more, 'Hello, you have reached the 
Schell residence. I am speaking like an answering message, even though it's really me on 
the phone. If you'd like to talk to me or Grandma, please begin at the beep sound I'm 
about to make. Beeeeep. Hello?' It was a child's voice, a boy's. 'It's really me. I'm here. Bon- 
jour?' I hung up. Grandma? I needed time to think, a taxi would be too quick, as would a 
bus, what was I afraid of? I put the suitcases on a pushcart and started walking, I was 
amazed that no one tried to stop me, not even as I pushed the cart onto the street, not even 
as I pushed it onto the side of the highway, with each step it became brighter and hotter, 
after only a few minutes it was clear I wouldn't be able to manage, I opened one of the 
suitcases and took out a stack of letters, 'To my child,' they were from 1977, 'To my child,' 

'To my child,' I thought about laying them on the road beside me, creating a trail of things 
I wasn't able to tell you, it might have made my load possible, but I couldn't, I needed to 
get them to you, to my child. I hailed a cab, by the time we reached your mother's apart- 
ment it was already getting late, I needed to find a hotel, I needed food and a shower and 
time to think, I ripped a page from the daybook and wrote, 'I'm sorry,' I handed it to the 
doorman, he said, 'Who's this for?' I wrote, 'Mrs. Schell,' he said, 'There is no Mrs. Schell,' I 
wrote, 'There is,' he said, 'Believe me. I'd know if there was a Airs. Schell in this building,' 
but I'd heard her voice on the phone, could she have moved and kept the number, how 
would I find her, I needed a phone book. I wrote '3D' and showed it to the doorman. He 

~ /V /*. 

said, 'Ms. Schmidt,' I took back my book and wrote, 'That was her maiden name.'ActAEA ! I 
lived in the guest room, she left me meals by the door, I could hear her footsteps and 
sometimes I thought I heard the rim of a glass against the door, was it a glass I once drank 
water from, had it ever touched your lips? I found my daybooks from before I left, they 
were in the body of the grandfather clock. I'd have thought she would have thrown them 
away, but she kept them, many were empty and many were filled, I wandered through 
them, I found the book from the afternoon we met and the book from the day after we got 
married, I found our first Nothing Place, and the last time we walked around the reser- 


153 



voir, I found pictures of banisters and sinks and fireplaces, on top of one of the stacks was 
the book from the first time I tried to leave, 'I haven't always been silent, I used to talk and 
talk and talk and talk.' I don't know if she began to feel sorry for me, or sorry for herself, 
but she started paying me short visits, she wouldn't say anything at first, only tidy up the 
room, brush cobwebs from the corners, vacuum the carpet, straighten the picture frames, 
and then one day, as she dusted the bedside table, she said, 'I can forgive you for leaving, 
but not for coming back,' she walked out and closed the door behind her, I didn't see her 
again for three days, and then it was as if nothing had been said, she replaced a light bulb 
that had worked fine, she picked things up and put them down, she said, 'I'm not going to 
share this grief with you,' she closed the door behind her, was I the prisoner or the guard? 
Her visits became longer, we never had conversations, and she didn't like to look at me, 
but something was happening, we were getting closer, or farther apart, I took a chance, I 
asked if she would pose for me, like when we first met, she opened her mouth and noth- 
ing came out, she touched my left hand, which I hadn't realized was in a fist, was that how 
she said yes, or was that how she touched me? I went to the art supply store to buy some 
clay, I couldn't keep my hands to myself, the pastels in long boxes, the palette knives, the 
handmade papers hanging on rolls, I tested every sample, I wrote my name in blue pen 
and in green oil stick, in orange crayon and in charcoal, it felt like I was signing the con- 
tract of my life. I was there for more than an hour, although I bought only a simple block 
of clay, when I came home she was waiting for me in the guest room, she was in a robe, 
standing beside the bed, 'Did you make any sculptures while you were away?' I wrote that 
I had tried but couldn't, 'Not even one?' I showed her my right hand, 'Did you think about 
sculptures? Did you make them in your head?' I showed her my left hand, she took off her 
robe and went onto the sofa, I couldn't look at her, I took the clay from the bag and set it 
up on the card table, 'Did you ever make a sculpture of me in your head?' I wrote, 'How 
do you want to pose?' She said the whole point was that I should choose, I asked if the 
carpeting was new, she said, 'Look at me,' I tried but I couldn't, she said, 'Look at me or 
leave me. But don't stay and look at anything else.' I asked her to lie on her back, but that 
wasn't right, I asked her to sit, it wasn't right, cross your arms, turn your head away from 
me, nothing was right, she said, 'Show me how,' I went over to her, I undid her hair, I 
pressed down on her shoulders, I wanted to touch her across all of those distances, she 
said, 'I haven't been touched since you left. Not in that way.' I pulled back my hand, she 
took it into hers and pressed it against her shoulder, I didn't know what to say, she asked, 
'Have you?' What's the point of a lie that doesn't protect anything? I showed her my left 
hand. 'Who touched you?' My daybook was filled, so I wrote on the wall, 'I wanted so 
much to have a life.' 

'Who?' I couldn't believe the honesty as it traveled down my arm and came out my pen, 'I 
paid for it.' She didn't lose her pose, 'Were they pretty?' 

'That wasn't the point.' 

'But were they?' 

'Some of them.' 

'So you just gave them money and that was it?' 

'I liked to talk to them. I talked about you.' 


154 



'Is that supposed to make me feel good?' I looked at the clay. ’Did you tell them that I was 
pregnant when you left?’ I showed her my left hand. ’Did you tell them about Anna?’ I 
showed her my left hand. 'Did you care for any of them?' I looked at the clay, she said, 'I 
love that you are telling me the truth,' and she took my hand from her shoulder and 
pressed it between her legs, she didn't turn her head to the side, she didn't close her eyes, 
she stared at our hands between her legs, I felt like I was killing something, she undid my 
belt and unzipped my pants, she reached her hand under my underpants, 'I'm nervous,' I 
said, by smiling, 'It's OK,' she said, 'I'm sorry,' I said, by smiling, 'It's OK,' she said, she 
closed the door behind her, then opened it and asked, 'Did you ever make a sculpture of 

~ /*. /V 

me in your head?'ActA€A ! There won't be enough pages in this book for me to tell you 
what I need to tell you, I could write smaller, I could slice the pages down their; edges to 
make two pages, I could write over my own writing, but then what? Every afternoon 
someone would come to the apartment, I could hear the door opening, and the footsteps, 
little footsteps, I heard talking, a child's voice, almost a song, it was the voice I'd heard 
when I called from the airport, the two of them would talk for hours, I asked her one eve- 
ning, when she came to pose, who paid her all of those visits, she said, 'My grandson.' 

'I have a grandson.' 

'No,' she said, 'I have a grandson.' 

'What's his name?' We tried again, we took off each other's clothes with the slowness of 
people who know how easy it is to be proven wrong, she lay face-down on the bed, her 
waist was irritated from pants that hadn't fit her in years, her thighs were scarred, I 
kneaded them with YES and NO, she said, 'Don't look at anything else,' I spread her legs, 
she inhaled, I could stare into the most private part of her and she couldn't see me looking, 
I slid my hand under her, she bent her knees, I closed my eyes, she said, 'Lie on top of me,' 
there was nowhere to write that I was nervous, she said, 'Lie on top of me.' I was afraid I'd 
crush her, she said, 'All of you on all of me,' I let myself sink into her, she said, 'That's what 
I've wanted,' why couldn't I have left it like that, why did I have to write anything else, I 
should have broken my fingers, I took a pen from the bedside table and wrote 'Can I see 
him?' on my arm. She turned over, spilling my body next to her, 'No.' I begged with my 
hands. 'No.' 

'Please.' 

'Please.' 

'I won't let him know who I am. I just want to see him.' 

'No.' 

'Why not?’ 

'Because.' 

'Because why?' 

'Because I changed his diapers. And I couldn't sleep on my stomach for two years. And I 
taught him how to speak. And I cried when he cried. And when he was unreasonable, he 
yelled at me.' 

'I'll hide in the coat closet and look through the keyhole.' I thought she would say no, she 
said, 'If he ever sees you, you will have betrayed me.' Did she feel pity for me, did she 


155 



want me to suffer? The next morning, she led me to the coat closet, which faces the living 
room, she went in with me, we were in there all day, although she knew he wouldn't come 
until the afternoon, it was too small, we needed more space between us, we needed Noth- 
ing Places, she said, 'This is what it's felt like, except you weren't here.' We looked at each 
other in silence for hours. When the bell rang, she went to let him in, I was on my hands 
and knees so my eye would be at the right level, through the keyhole I saw the door open, 
those white shoes, 'Oskar!' she said, lifting him from the ground, 'I'm OK,' he said, that 
song, in his voice I heard my own voice, and my father's and grandfather's, and it was the 
first time I'd heard your voice, 'Oskar!' she said again, lifting him again, I saw his face, 
Anna's eyes, 'I'm OK,' he said again, he asked her where she had been, 'I was talking to the 
renter,' she said. The renter? 'Is he still here?' he asked, 'No,' she said, 'he had to go run 
some errands.' 

'But how did he get out of the apartment?' 

'He left right before you came.' 

'But you said you were just talking to him.' He knew about me, he didn't know who I was, 
but he knew someone was there, and he knew she wasn't telling the truth, I could hear it 
in his voice, in my voice, in your voice, I needed to talk to him, but what did I need to say? 
I'm your grandfather, I love you. I'm sorry? Maybe I needed to tell him the things I could- 
n't tell you, give him all the letters that were supposed to be for your eyes. But she would 
never give me her permission, and I wouldn't betray her, so I started to think about other 

~ /V /V 

waysAct A€A ! What am I going to do, I need more room, I have things I need to say, my 
words are pushing at the walls of the paper's edge, the next day, your mother came to the 
guest room and posed for me, I worked the clay with YES and NO, I made it soft, I pressed 
my thumbs into her cheeks, bringing her nose forward, leaving my thumbprints, I carved 
out pupils, I strengthened her brow, I hollowed out the space between her bottom lip and 
chin, I picked up a daybook and went over to her. I started to write about where I'd been 
and what I'd done since I left, how I'd made my living, whom I'd spent my time with, 
what I'd thought about and listened to and eaten, but she ripped the page from the book, 'I 
don't care,' she said, I don't know if she really didn't care or if it was something else, on the 
next blank page I wrote, 'If there's anything you want to know. I'll tell you,' she said, 'I 
know it will make your life easier to tell me, but I don't want to know anything.' How 
could that be? I asked her to tell me about you, she said, 'Not our son, my son,' I asked her 
to tell me about her son, she said, 'Every Thanksgiving I made a turkey and pumpkin pie. I 
would go to the schoolyard and ask the children what toys they liked. I bought those for 
him. I wouldn't let anyone speak a foreign language in the apartment. But he still became 
you.' 

'He became me?' 

'Everything was yes and no.' 

'Did he go to college?' 

'I begged him to stay close, but he went to California. In that way he was also like you.' 
'What did he study?' 

'He was going to be a lawyer, but he took over the business. He hated jewelry.' 


156 



'Why didn't you sell it?' 

'I begged him. I begged him to be a lawyer.' 

'Then why?' 

'He wanted to be his own father.' I'm sorry, if that's true, the last thing I would have 
wanted was for you to be like me, I left so you could be you. She said, 'He tried to find you 
once. I gave him that only letter you ever sent. He was obsessed with it, always reading it. 

I don't know what you wrote, but it made him go and look for you.' On the next blank 
page I wrote, 'I opened the door one day and there he was.' 

'He found you?' 

'We talked about nothing.' 

'I didn't know he found you.' 

'He wouldn't tell me who he was. He must have become nervous. Or he must have hated 
me once he saw me. He pretended to be a journalist. It was so terrible. He said he was do- 
ing a story about the survivors of Dresden.' 

'Did you tell him what happened to you that night?' 

'It was in the letter.' 

'What did you write?' 

'You didn't read it?' 

'You didn't send it to me.' 

'It was terrible. All of the things we couldn't share. The room was filled with conversations 
we weren't having.' I didn't tell her that after you left, I stopped eating, I got so skinny that 
the bathwater would collect between my bones, why didn't anyone ask me why I was so 
skinny? If someone had asked, I never would have eaten another bite. 'But if he didn't tell 
you he was your son, how did you know?' 

'I knew because he was my son.' She put her hand on my chest, over my heart, I put my 
hands on her thighs, I put my hands around her, she undid my pants, 'I'm nervous,' de- 
spite everything I wanted, the sculpture was looking more and more like Anna, she closed 

~ /V /\ 

the door behind her, I'm running out of roomAct A€A ! I spent most of my days walking 
around the city, getting to know it again, I went to the old Columbian Bakery but it wasn't 
there anymore, in its place was a ninety-nine-cent store where everything cost more than 
ninety-nine, cents. I went by the tailor shop where I used to get my pants taken in, but 
there was a bank, you needed a card just to open the door, I walked for hours, down one 
side of Broadway and up the other, where there had been a watch repairman there was a 
video store, where there had been a flower market there was a store for video games, 
where there had been a butcher there was sushi, what's sushi, and what happens to all of 
the broken watches? I spent hours at the dog run on the side of the natural history mu- 
seum, a pit bull, a Labrador, a golden retriever, I was the only person without a dog, I 
thought and thought, how could I be close to Oskar from far away, how could I be fair to 
you and fair to your mother and fair to myself, I wanted to carry the closet door with me 
so I could always look at him through the keyhole, I did the next best thing. I learned his 
life from a distance, when he went to school, when he came home, where his friends lived. 


157 



what stores he liked to go to, I followed him all over the city, but I didn't betray your 
mother, because I never let him know I was there. I thought it could go on like that for- 
ever, and yet here I am, once again I was proven wrong. I don't remember when the 
strangeness of it first occurred to me, how much he was out, how many neighborhoods he 
went to, why I was the only one watching him, how his mother could let him wander so 
far so alone. Every weekend morning, he left the building with an old man and went 
knocking on doors around the city, I made a map of where they went, but I couldn't make 
sense of it, it made no sense, what were they doing? And who was the old man, a friend, a 
teacher, a replacement for a missing grandfather? And why did they stay for only a few 
minutes at each apartment, were they selling something, collecting information? And what 
did his grandmother know, was I the only one worried about him? After they left one 
house, on Staten Island, I waited around and knocked on the door, 'I can't believe it,' the 
woman said, 'another visitor!' 

'I'm sorry,' I wrote, 'I don't speak. That was my grandson who just left. Could you tell me 
what he was doing here?' The woman told me, 'What a strange family you are.' I thought. 
Family we are. 

'I just got off the phone with his mother.' I wrote, 'Why was he here?' She said, 'For the 
key.' I asked, 'What key?' She said, 'For the lock.' 

'What lock?’ 

'Don't you know?' For eight months I followed him and talked to the people he talked to, I 
tried to learn about him as he tried to learn about you, he was trying to find you, just as 
you'd tried to find me, it broke my heart into more pieces than my heart was made of, why 
can't people say what they mean at the time? One afternoon I followed him downtown, we 
sat across from each other on the subway, the old man looked at me, was I staring, was I 
reaching my arms out in front of me, did he know that I should have been the one sitting 
next to Oskar? They went into a coffee store, on the way back I lost them, it happened all 
the time, it's hard to stay close without making yourself known, and I wouldn't betray her. 
When I got back to the Upper West Side I went into a bookstore, I couldn't go to the 
apartment yet, I needed time to think, at the end of the aisle I saw a man who I thought 
might be Simon Goldberg, he was also in the children's section, the more I looked at him, 
the more unsure I was, the more I wanted it to be him, had he gone to work instead of to 
his death? My hands shook against the change in my pockets, I tried not to stare, I tried 
not to reach my arms out in front of me, could it be, did he recognize me, he'd written, 'It 
is my great hope that our paths, however long and winding, will cross again.' Fifty years 
later he wore the same thick glasses, I'd never seen a whiter shirt, he had a hard time let- 
ting go of books, I went up to him. 'I don't speak,' I wrote, 'I'm sorry.' He wrapped his 
arms around me and squeezed, I could feel his heart beating against my heart, they were 
trying to beat in unison, without saying a word he turned around and rushed away from 
me, out of the store, into the street, I'm almost sure it wasn't him, I want an infinitely long 

~ /\ /V 

blank book and the rest of timeA(tA€A ! The next day, Oskar and the old man went to the 
Empire State Building, I waited for them on the street. I kept looking up, trying to see him, 
my neck was burning, was he looking down at me, were we sharing something without 
either of us knowing it? After an hour, the elevator doors opened and the old man came 


158 



out, was he going to leave Oskar up there, so high up, so alone, who would keep him safe? 
I hated him. I started to write something, he came up to me and grabbed me by the collar. 
'Listen,' he said, 'I don't know who you are, but I've seen you following us, and I don't like 
it. Not a bit. This is the only time I'm going to tell you to stay away.' My book had fallen to 
the floor, so I couldn't say anything. 'If I ever see you again, anywhere near that boy - ' I 
pointed at the floor, he let go of my collar, I picked up the book and wrote, 'I'm Oskar's 
grandfather. I don't speak. I'm sorry.' 

'His grandfather?' I flipped back and pointed at what I'd been writing, 'Where is he?' 

'Oskar doesn't have a grandfather.' I pointed at the page. 'He's walking down the stairs.' I 
quickly explained everything as best I could, my handwriting was becoming illegible, he 
said, 'Oskar wouldn't lie to me.' I wrote, 'He didn't lie. He doesn't know.' The old man took 
a necklace from under his shirt and looked at it, the pendant was a compass, he said, 'Os- 
kar is my friend. I have to tell him.' 

'He's my grandson. Please don't.' 

'You're the one who should be going around with him.' 

'I have been.' 

'And what about his mother?' 

'What about his mother?' We heard Oskar singing from around the corner, his voice was 
getting louder, the old man said, 'He's a good boy,' and walked away. I went straight 
home, the apartment was empty. I thought about packing my bags, I thought about jump- 
ing out a window, I sat on the bed and thought, I thought about you. What kind of food 
did you like, what was your favorite song, who was the first girl you kissed, and where, 

and how. I'm running out of room, I want an infinitely long blank book and forever, I 

~ /\ 

don't A, A know how much time passed, it didn't matter. I'd lost all of my reasons to keep 
track. Someone rang the bell, I didn't get up, I didn't care who it was, I wanted to be alone, 
on the other side of the window. I heard the door open and I heard his voice, my reason, 
'Grandma?' He was in the apartment, it was just the two of us, grandfather and grandson. 

I heard him going from room to room, moving things, opening and closing, what was he 
looking for, why was he always looking? He came to my door, 'Grandma?' I didn't want to 
betray her, I turned off the lights, what was I so afraid of? 'Grandma?' He started crying, 
my grandson was crying. 'Please. I really need help. If you're in there, please come out.' I 
turned on the light, why wasn't I more afraid? 'Please.' I opened the door and we faced 
each other, I faced myself, 'Are you the renter?' I went back into the room and got this 
daybook from the closet, this book that is nearly out of pages, I brought it to him and 
wrote, 'I don't speak. I'm sorry.' I was so grateful to have him looking at me, he asked me 
who I was, I didn't know what to tell him, I invited him into the room, he asked me if I 
was a stranger, I didn't know what to tell him, he was still crying, I didn't know how to 
hold him. I'm running out of room. I brought him over to the bed, he sat down, I didn't ask 
him any questions or tell him what I already knew, we didn't talk about unimportant 
things, we didn't become friends, I could have been anyone, he began at the beginning, the 
vase, the key, Brooklyn, Queens, I knew the lines by heart. Poor child, telling everything to 
a stranger, I wanted to build walls around him, I wanted to separate inside from outside, I 
wanted to give him an infinitely long blank book and the rest of time, he told me how he'd 


159 



just gone up to the top of the Empire State Building, how his friend had told him he was 
finished, it wasn't what I'd wanted, but if it was necessary to bring my grandson face to 
face with me, it was worth it, anything would have been. I wanted to touch him, to tell 
him that even if everyone left everyone, I would never leave him, he talked and talked, his 
words fell through him, trying to find the floor of his sadness, 'My dad,' he said, 'My dad,' 
he ran across the street and came back with a phone, 'These are his last words.' 

MESSAGE FIVE. 

10:22 A.M. IT’S DA 
S DAD. HEL 
SDAD. KNOWIF 
EAR ANY 
THIS I'M 
HELLO? 

YOU HEAR ME? WE 

TO THE ROOF 

EVERYTHING 

OK 

FINE 

SOON 

SORRY 

HEAR ME 

MUCH 

HAPPENS, 

REMEMBER - 

The message was cut off, you sounded so calm, you didn't sound like someone who was 
about to die, I wish we could have sat across a table and talked about nothing for hours, I 
wish we could have wasted time, I want an infinitely blank book and the rest of time. I 
told Oskar it was best not to let his grandma know we'd met, he didn't ask why, I wonder 
what he knew, I told him if he ever wanted to talk to me, he could throw pebbles at the 
guest room window and I would come down to meet him on the corner, I was afraid I'd 
never get to see him again, to see him seeing me, that night was the first time your mother 
and I made love since I returned, and the last time we ever made love, it didn't feel like the 
last time. I'd kissed Anna for me last time, seen my parents for the last time, spoken for the 
last time, why didn't I learn to treat everything like it was the last time, my greatest regret 
is how much I believed in the future, she said, 'I want to show you something,' she led me 
to the second bedroom, her hand was squeezing YES, she opened the door and pointed at 
the bed, "That's where he used to sleep,' I touched the sheets, I lowered myself to the floor 
and smelled the pillow, I wanted anything of you that I could have, I wanted dust, she 
said, 'Years and years ago. Thirty years. I lay on the bed, I wanted to feel what you felt, I 
wanted to tell you everything, she lay next to me, she asked, 'Do you believe in heaven 


160 



and hell?' I held up my right hand, 'Neither do I,' she said, 'I think after you live it's like 
before you lived, her hand was open, I put YES into it, she dosed her fingers around mine, 
she said, "Think of all the things that haven't been born yet. All the babies. Some never will 
be born. Is that sad?' I didn't know if it was sad, all the parents that would never meet, all 
the miscarriages, I closed my eyes, she: said, 'A few days, before the bombing, my father 
took me out to the shed. He gave me a sip of whiskey and let me try his pipe. It made me 
feel so adult, so special. He asked me what I knew about sex. I coughed and coughed. He 
laughed and laughed and became serious. He asked if I knew how to pack a suitcase, and 
if I knew never to accept the first offer, and if I could start a fire if I had to. I loved my fa- 
ther very much. I loved him very, very much. But I never found a way to tell him. I turned 
my head to the side, I rested it on her shoulder, she put her hand on my cheek, just like my 
mother used to, everything she did reminded me of 'someone else, 'It's a shame,' she said, 
'that life is so precious.' I turned onto my side and put my arm around her. I'm running 
out of room, my eyes were closed and I kissed her, her lips were my mother's lips, and 
Anna's lips, and your lips, I didn't know how to be with her and be with her. 'It makes us 
worry so much, she said, unbuttoning her shirt, I unbuttoned mine, she took off her pants, 
I took off mine, 'We worry so much,' I touched her and touched everyone, 'It's all we do,' 
we made love for the last time, I was with her and with everyone, when she got up to go 
to the bathroom there was blood on the sheets, I went back to the guest room to sleep, 
there are so many things you'll never know. The next morning I was awoken by a tapping 
on the window, I told your mother I was going for a walk, she didn't ask anything, what 
did she know, why did she let me out of her sight? 

Oskar was waiting for me under the streetlamp, he said, 'I want to die up his grave.' 
[Remaining text unreadable] 

