MY FEELINGS 


12 September 2003 
Dear Oskar, 

I am writing this to you from the airport. 

I have so much to say to you. I want to begin at the beginning, because that is what you 
deserve. I want to tell you everything, without leaving out a single detail. But where is the 
beginning? And what is everything? 

I am an old woman now, but once I was a girl. It's true. I was a girl like you are a boy. One 
of my chores was to bring in the mail. One day there was a note addressed to our house. 
There was no name on it. It was mine as much as anyone's, I thought. I opened it. Many 
words had been removed from the text by a censor. 

14 January 1921 

To Whom Shall Receive This Letter: 

My name is XXXXXXX XXXXXXXXX, and I am a XXXXXXXX in Turkish Labor 
Camp XXXXX, Block XX. I know that I am lucky XX X XXXXXXX to be alive at all. I 
have chosen to write to you without knowing who you are. My parents XXXXXXX 
XXX. My brothers and sisters XXXXX XXXX, the main XXXXXX XX XXXXXXXX! I 
have written XXX XX XXXXX XXXXXXX every day since I have been here. I trade 
bread for postage, but have not yet received a response. Sometimes it comforts me 
to think that they do not mail the letters we write. 

XXX XX XXXXXX, or at least XXX XXXXXXXXX? XX XXXXX X XX throughout 
XXXXX XX. XXX XXX XX XXXXX, and XXXXX XX XXXXX XX XXX, without once 
XXX XX XXXXXX, XXX XXXXXXXX XXX XXXXX nightmare? 

XXX XXX, XX XXXXX XX XXXXX XX! XXXXX XX XXX XX XXX XX XXXXXX to 
write a few words to me I would appreciate it more than you ever could know. 
Several of the XXXXXX XXXX received mail so I know that XX XX XXXXXXXX. 
Please include a picture of yourself as well as your name. Include everything. 

With great hopes. 

Sincerely I am, 

XXXXXXXX XXXXXXXXX 

I took the letter straight to my room. I put it under my mattress. I never told my father or 
mother about it. For weeks I was awake all night wondering. Why was this man sent to a 


33 



Turkish labor camp? Why had the letter come fifteen years after it had been written? 
Where had it been for those fifteen years? Why hadn't anyone written back to him? The 
others got mail, he said. Why had he sent a letter to our house? How did he know the 
name of my street? How did he know of Dresden? Where did he learn German? What be- 
came of him? 

I tried to learn as much about the man as I could from the letter. The words were very 
simple. Bread means only bread. Mail is mail. Great hopes are great hopes are great hopes. 
I was left with the handwriting. 

So I asked my father, your great-grandfather, whom I considered the best, most kind- 
hearted man I knew, to write a letter to me. I told him it didn't matter what he wrote 
about. Just write, I said. Write anything. 

Darling, 

You asked me to write you a letter, so I am writing you a letter. I do not know why 
I am writing this letter, or what this letter is supposed to be about, but I am writing 
it nonetheless, because I love you very much and trust that you have some good 
purpose for having me write this letter. I hope that one day you will have the ex- 
perience of doing something you do not understand for someone you love. 

Your father 

That letter is the only thing of my father's that I have left. Not even a picture. 

Next I went to the penitentiary. My uncle was a guard there. I was able to get the hand- 
writing sample of a murderer. My uncle asked him to write an appeal for early release. It 
was a terrible trick that we played on this man. 

To the Prison Board: 

My name is Kurt Schluter. I am Inmate 24922. 1 was put here in jail a few years ago. 
I don't know how long it's been. We don't have calendars. I keep lines on the wall 
with chalk. But when it rains, the rain comes through my window when I am sleep- 
ing. And when I wake up the lines are gone. So I don't know how long it's been. I 
murdered my brother. I beat his head in with a shovel. Then after I used that shovel 
to bury him in the yard. The soil was red. Weeds came from the grass where his 
body was. Sometimes at night I would get on my knees and pull them out, so no 
one would know. I did a terrible thing. I believe in the afterlife. I know that you 
can't take anything back. I wish that my days could be washed away like the chalk 
lines of my days. 

I have tried to become a good person. I help the other inmates with their chores. I 
am patient now. 

It might not matter to you, but my brother was having an affair with my wife. I 
didn't kill my wife. I want to go back to her, because I forgive her. 

If you release me I will be a good person, quiet, out of the way. Please consider my 
appeal. Kurt Schluter, Inmate 24922 

My uncle later told me that the inmate had been in prison for more than forty years. He 
had gone in as a young man. When he wrote the letter to me he was old and broken. His 


34 



wife had remarried. She had children and grandchildren. Although he never said it, I 
could tell that my uncle had befriended the inmate. He had also lost a wife, and was also 
in a prison. He never said it, but I heard in his voice that he cared for the inmate. They 
guarded each other. And when I asked my uncle, several years later, what became of the 
inmate, my uncle told me that he was still there. He continued to write letters to the board. 
He continued to blame himself and forgive his wife, not knowing that there was no one on 
the other end. My uncle took each letter and promised the inmate that they would be de- 
livered. But instead he kept them all. They filled all of the drawers in his dresser. I remem- 
ber thinking it's enough to drive someone to kill himself. I was right. My uncle, your great- 
great-uncle, killed himself. Of course it's possible that the inmate had nothing to do with 
it. With those three samples I could make comparisons. I could at least see that the forced 
laborer's handwriting was more like my father's than the murderer's. But I knew that I 
would need more letters. As many as I could get. 

So I went to my piano teacher. I always wanted to kiss him, but was afraid he would laugh 
at me. I asked him to write a letter. And then I asked my mother's sister. She loved dance 
but hated dancing. 

I asked my schoolmate Mary to write a letter to me. She was funny and full of life. She 
liked to run around her empty house without any clothes on, even once she was too old 
for that. Nothing embarrassed her. I admired that so much, because everything embar- 
rassed me, and that hurt me. She loved to jump on her bed. She jumped on her bed for so 
many years that one afternoon, while I watched her jump, the seams burst. Feathers filled 
the small room. Our laughter kept the feathers in the air. I thought about birds. Could they 
fly if there wasn't someone, somewhere, laughing? 

I went to my grandmother, your great-great-grandmother, and asked her to write a letter. 
She was my mother's mother. Your father's mother's mother's mother. I hardly knew her. I 
didn't have any interest in knowing her. I have no need for the past, I thought, like a child. 
I did not consider that the past might have a need for me. What kind of letter? my grand- 
mother asked. I told her to write whatever she wanted to write. You want a letter from 
me? she asked. I told her yes. Oh, God bless you, she said. 

The letter she gave me was sixty-seven pages long. It was the story of her life. She made 
my request into her own. Listen to me. I learned so much. She sang in her youth. She had 
been to America as a girl. I never knew that. She had fallen in love so many times that she 
began to suspect she was not falling in love at all, but doing something much more ordi- 
nary. I learned that she never learned to swim, and for that reason she always loved rivers 
and lakes. She asked her father, my great-grandfather, your great-great-great-grandfather, 
to buy her a dove. Instead he bought her a silk scarf. So she thought of the scarf as a dove. 
She even convinced herself that it contained flight, but did not fly, because it did not want 
to show anyone what it really was. That was how much she loved her father. The letter 
was destroyed, but its final paragraph is inside of me. She wrote: 

I wish I could be a girl again, with the chance to live my life again. I have suffered 
so much more than I needed to. And the joys I have felt have not always been joy- 
ous. I could have lived differently. When I was your age, my grandfather bought 
me a ruby bracelet. It was too big for me and would slide up and down my arm. It 


35 



was almost a necklace. He later told me that he had asked the jeweler to make it 
that way. Its size was supposed to be a symbol of his love. More rubies, more love. 
But I could not wear it comfortably. I could not wear it at all. So here is the point of 
everything I have been trying to say. If I were to give a bracelet to you, now, I 
would measure your wrist twice. 

With love. 

Your grandmother 

I had a letter from everyone I knew. I laid them out on my bedroom floor, and organized 
them by what they shared. One hundred letters. I was always moving them around, trying 
to make connections. I wanted to understand. 

Seven years later, a childhood friend reappeared at the moment I most needed him. I had 
been in America for only two months. An agency was supporting me, but soon I would 
have to support myself. I did not know how to support myself. I read newspapers and 
magazines all day long. I wanted to learn idioms. I wanted to become a real American. 

Chew the fat. Blow off some steam. Close but no cigar. Rings a bell. I must have sounded 
ridiculous. I only wanted to be natural. I gave up on that. 

I had not seen him since I lost everything. I had not thought of him. He and my older sis- 
ter, Anna, were friends. I came upon them kissing one afternoon in the field behind the 
shed behind our house. It made me so excited. I felt as if I were kissing someone. I had 
never kissed anyone. I was more excited than if it had been me. Our house was small. 

Anna and I shared a bed. That night I told her what I had seen. She made me promise 
never to speak a word about it. I promised her. 

She said. Why should I believe you? 

I wanted to tell her. Because what I saw would no longer be mine if I talked about it. I 
said. Because I am your sister. Thank you. Can I watch you kiss? Can you watch us kiss? 

You could tell me where you are going to kiss, and I could hide and watch. 

She laughed enough to migrate an entire flock of birds. That was how she said yes. 

Sometimes it was in the field behind the shed behind our house. Sometimes it was behind 
the brick wall in the schoolyard. It was always behind something. 

I wondered if she told him. I wondered if she could feel me watching them, if that made it 
more exciting for her. Why did I ask to watch? Why did she agree? 

I had gone to him when I was trying to learn more about the forced laborer. I had gone to 
everyone. 

To Anna's sweet little sister. 

Here is the letter you asked for. I am almost two meters in height. My eyes are 
brown. I have been told that my hands are big. I want to be a sculptor, and I want to 
marry your sister. Those are my only dreams. I could write more, but that is all that 
matters. 

Your friend, 

Thomas 


36 



I walked into a bakery seven years later and there he was. He had dogs at his feet and a 
bird in a cage beside him. The seven years were not seven years. They were not seven 
hundred years. Their length could not be measured in years, just as an ocean could not ex- 
plain the distance we had traveled, just as the dead can never be counted. I wanted to run 
away from him, and I wanted to go right up next to him. I went right up next to him. Are 
you Thomas? I asked. He shook his head no. You are, I said. I know you are. He shook his 
head no. From Dresden. 

He opened his right hand, which had NO tattooed on it. I remember you. I used to watch 
you kiss my sister. He took out a little book and wrote, I don't speak. I'm sorry. That made 
me cry. He wiped away my tears. But he did not admit to being who he was. He never 
did. 

We spent the afternoon together. The whole time I wanted to touch him. I felt so deeply 
for this person that I had not seen in so long. Seven years before, he had been a giant, and 
now he seemed small. I wanted to give him the money that the agency had given me. I did 
not need to tell him my story, but I needed to listen to his. I wanted to protect him, which I 
was sure I could do, even if I could not protect myself. 

I asked. Did you become a sculptor, like you dreamed? He showed me his right hand and 
there was silence. We had everything to say to each other, but no ways to say it. He wrote. 
Are you OK? I told him. My eyes are crummy. He wrote. But are you OK? I told him. 

That's a very complicated question. He wrote. That's a very simple answer. I asked. Are 
you OK? 

He wrote. Some mornings I wake up feeling grateful. We talked for hours, but we just kept 
repeating those same things over and over. 

Our cups emptied. The day emptied. 

I was more alone than if I had been alone. We were about to go in different directions. We 
did not know how to do anything else. It's getting late, I said. 

He showed me his left hand, which had YES tattooed on it. I said, I should probably go 
home. 

He flipped back through his book and pointed at. Are you OK? I nodded yes. 

I started to walk off. I was going to walk to the Hudson River and keep walking. I would 
carry the biggest stone I could bear and let my lungs fill with water. 

But then I heard him clapping his hands behind me. I turned around and he motioned for 
me to come to him. I wanted to run away from him, and I wanted to go to him. I went to 
him. 

He asked if I would pose for him. He wrote his question in German, and it wasn't until 
then that I realized he had been writing in English all afternoon, and that I had been 
speaking English. Yes, I said in German. Yes. We made arrangements for the next day. His 
apartment was like a zoo. There were animals everywhere. Dogs and cats. A dozen bird- 
cages. Fish tanks. Glass boxes with snakes and lizards and insects. Mice in cages, so the 
cats wouldn't get them. Like Noah's ark. But he kept one corner clean and bright. He said 
he was saving the space. For what? For sculptures. 

I wanted to know from what, or from whom, but I did not ask. He led me by the hand. We 

37 



talked for half an hour about what he wanted to make. I told him I would do whatever he 
needed. We drank coffee. 

He wrote that he had not made a sculpture in America. Why not? 

I haven't been able to. Why not? 

We never talked about the past. He opened the flue, although I didn't know why. Birds 
sang in the other room. I took off my clothes. I went onto the couch. 

He stared at me. It was the first time I had ever been naked in front of a man. I wondered 
if he knew that. 

He came over and moved my body like I was a doll. He put my hands behind my head. 

He bent my right leg a little. I assumed his hands were so rough from all of the sculptures 
he used to make. He lowered my chin. He turned my palms up. His attention filled the 
hole in the middle of me. 

I went back the next day. And the next day. I stopped looking for a job. All that mattered 
was him looking at me. I was prepared to fall apart if it came to that. Each time it was the 
same. He would talk about what he wanted to make. I would tell him I would do what- 
ever he needed. We would drink coffee. We would never talk about the past. He would 
open the flue. The birds would sing in the other room. I would undress. He would posi- 
tion me. He would sculpt me. 

Sometimes I would think about those hundred letters laid across my bedroom floor. If I 
hadn't collected them, would our house have burned less brightly? 

I looked at the sculpture after every session. He went to feed the animals. He let me be 
alone with it, although I never asked him for privacy. He understood. 

After only a few sessions it became clear that he was sculpting Anna. He was trying to re- 
make the girl he knew seven years before. He looked at me as he sculpted, but he saw her. 
The positioning took longer and longer. He touched more of me. 

He moved me around more. He spent ten full minutes bending and unbending my knee. 
He closed and unclosed my hands. 

I hope this doesn't embarrass you, he wrote in German in his little book. 

No, I said in German. No. 

He folded one of my arms. He straightened one of my arms. The next week he touched my 
hair for what might have been five or fifty minutes. 

He wrote, I am looking for an acceptable compromise. 

I wanted to know how he lived through that night. 

He touched my breasts, easing them apart. 

I think this will be good, he wrote. 

I wanted to know what will be good. How will it be good? 

He touched me all over. I can tell you these things because I am not ashamed of them, be- 
cause I learned from them. And I trust you to understand me. You are the only one I trust, 
Oskar. 

The positioning was the sculpting. He was sculpting me. He was trying to make me so he 

38 



could fall in love with me. 


He spread my legs. His palms pressed gently at the insides of my thighs. My thighs 
pressed back. His palms pressed out. 

Birds were singing in the other room. 

We were looking for an acceptable compromise. 

The next week he held the backs of my legs, and the next week he was behind me. It was 
the first time I had ever made love. I wondered if he knew that. It felt like crying. I won- 
dered, Why does anyone ever make love? 

I looked at the unfinished sculpture of my sister, and the unfinished girl looked back at 
me. 

Why does anyone ever make love? 

We walked together to the bakery where we first met. 

Together and separately. 

We sat at a table. On the same side, facing the windows. 

I did not need to know if he could love me. 

I needed to know if he could need me. 

I flipped to the next blank page of his little book and wrote, Please marry me. 

He looked at his hands. 

YES and NO. 

Why does anyone ever make love? 

He took his pen and wrote on the next and last page. No children. 

That was our first rule. 

I understand, I told him in English. 

We never used German again. 

The next day, your grandfather and I were married. 

MY FEELINGS 


They are announcing flights over the speakers. We are not listening. They do not matter to 
us, because we are not going anywhere. I miss you already, Oskar. I missed you even 
when I was with you. That's been my problem. I miss what I already have, and I surround 
myself with things that are missing. 

Every time I put in a new page, I look at your grandfather. I am so relieved to see his face. 
It makes me feel safe. His shoulders are pinched. His spine is curved. In Dresden he was a 
giant. I'm glad that his hands are still rough. The sculptures never left them. I didn't notice 
until now that he is still wearing his wedding ring. I wonder if he put it on when he came 
back or if he wore it all those years. Before I came here I locked up the apartment. I turned 
off the lights and made sure none of the faucets leaked. It's hard to say goodbye to the 
place you've lived. It can be as hard as saying goodbye to a person. We moved in after we 
were married. It had more room than his apartment. We needed it. We needed room for 
all of the animals, and we needed room between us. Your grandfather bought the most 
expensive insurance policy. A man from the company came over to take pictures. If any- 
thing happened, they would be able to rebuild the apartment again exactly as it was. He 
took a roll of film. He took a picture of the floor, a picture of the fireplace, a picture of the 
bathtub. I never confused what I had with what I was. When the man left, your grandfa- 
ther took out his own camera and started taking more pictures. What are you doing? I 
asked him. 

Better safe than sorry, he wrote. At the time I thought he was right, but I am not sure 
anymore. 

He took pictures of everything. Of the undersides of the shelves in the closet. Of the backs 
of the mirrors. Even the broken things. The things you would not want to remember. He 
could have rebuilt the apartment by taping together the pictures. 

And the doorknobs. He took a picture of every doorknob in the apartment. Every one. As 
if the world and its future depended on each doorknob. As if we would be thinking about 
doorknobs should we ever actually need to use the pictures of them. I don't know why 
that hurt me so much. I told him. They are not even nice doorknobs. He wrote. But they 
are our doorknobs. I was his too. 

He never took pictures of me, and we didn't buy life insurance. He kept one set of the pic- 
tures in his dresser. He taped another set into his daybooks, so they'd always be with him, 
in case something happened at home. 

Our marriage was not unhappy, Oskar. He knew how to make me laugh. And sometimes I 
made him laugh. We had to make rules, but who doesn't. There is nothing wrong with 
compromising. Even if you compromise almost everything. 

He got a job at a jewelry store, because he knew the machines. He worked so hard that 
they made him assistant manager, and then manager. He did not care about jewelry. He 
hated it. He used to say jewelry is the opposite of sculpture. But it was a living, and he 
promised me that was OK. We got our own store in a neighborhood that was next to a bad 
neighborhood. It was open from eleven in the morning until six at night. But there was 


90 



always work to be done. We spent our lives making livings. 

Sometimes he would go to the airport after work. I asked him to get me papers and maga- 
zines. At first this was because I wanted to learn American expressions. But I gave up on 
that. I still asked him to go. I knew that he needed my permission to go. It was not out of 
kindness that I sent him. We tried so hard. We were always trying to help each other. But 
not because we were helpless. He needed to get things for me, just as I needed to get 
things for him. It gave us purpose. Sometimes I would ask him for something that I did 
not even want, just to let him get it for me. We spent our days trying to help each other 
help each other. I would get his slippers. He would make my tea. I would turn up the heat 
so he could turn up the air conditioner so I could turn up the heat, 
their roughness. 

It was Halloween. Our first in the apartment. The doorbell rang. 

Your grandfather was at the airport. I opened the door and a child 
white sheet with holes cut out for her eyes. Trick or treat! she said. 

Who is that? 

I'm a ghost! 

What are you wearing that for? 

It's Halloween! 

I don't know what that means. 

Kids dress up and knock on doors, and you give them candy. 

I don't have any candy. 

It's Hal-lo-ween! 

I told her to wait. I went to the bedroom. I took an envelope from underneath the mattress. 
Our savings. Our living. I took out two one-hundred-dollar bills and put them in a differ- 
ent envelope, which I gave to the ghost. 

I was paying her to go away. 

I closed the door and turned off the lights so no more children would ring our bell. 

The animals must have understood, because they surrounded me and pressed into me. I 
did not say anything when your grandfather came home that night. I thanked him for the 
papers and magazines. I went to the guest room and pretended to write. I hit the space bar 
again and again and again. My life story was spaces. 

The days passed one at a time. And sometimes less than one at a time. 

We looked at each other and drew maps in our heads. I told him my eyes were crummy, 
because I wanted him to pay attention to me. We made safe places in the apartment where 
you could go and not exist. 

I would have done anything for him. Maybe that was my sickness. We made love in noth- 
ing places and turned the lights off. It felt like crying. We could not look at each other. It 
always had to be from behind. Like that first time. And I knew that he wasn't thinking of 
me. 

He squeezed my sides so hard, and pushed so hard. Like he was trying to push through 


His hands didn't lose 


was standing there in a 
I took a step back. 


91 



me to somewhere else. Why does anyone ever make love? 

A year passed. Another year. Another year. Another. We made livings. I never forgot 
about the ghost. I needed a child. 

What does it mean to need a child? 

One morning I awoke and understood the hole in the middle of me. I realized that I could 
compromise my life, but not life after me. I couldn't explain it. The need came before ex- 
planations. It was not out of weakness that I made it happen, but it was not out of strength 
either. It was out of need. I needed a child. I tried to hide it from him. I tried to wait to tell 
him until it was too late to do anything about it. It was the ultimate secret. Life. I kept it 
safe inside me. I took it around. Like the apartment was inside his books. I wore loose 
shirts. I sat with pillows on my lap. I was naked only in nothing places. But I could not 
keep it a secret forever. 

We were lying in bed in the darkness. I did not know how to say it. I knew, but I could not 
say it. I took one of his daybooks from the bedside table. 

The apartment had never been darker. I turned on the lamp. It became bright around us. 
The apartment became darker. I wrote, I am pregnant. I handed it to him. He read it. 

He took the pen and wrote. How could that have happened? I wrote, I made it happen. He 
wrote. But we had a rule. 

The next page was a doorknob. 

I turned the page and wrote, I broke the rule. 

He sat up in bed. I don't know how much time passed. 

He wrote. Everything will be OK. 

I told him OK wasn't enough. 

Everything will be OK perfect. 

I told him there was nothing left for a lie to protect. 

Everything will be OK perfect . 

I started to cry. 

It was the first time I had ever cried in front of him. It felt like making love. 

I asked him something I had needed to know since we made that first nothing place years 
before. What are we? Something or nothing? He covered my face with his hands and lifted 
them off. I did not know what that meant. The next morning I woke up with a terrible 
cold. I did not know if the baby was making me sick or if your grandfather was. 

When I said goodbye to him, before he left for the airport, I lifted his suitcase and it felt 
heavy. That was how I knew he was leaving me. 

I wondered if I should stop him. If I should wrestle him to the ground and force him to 
love me. I wanted to hold his shoulders down and shout into his face. I followed him 
there. 

I watched him all morning. I did not know how to talk to him. I watched him write in his 
book. I watched him ask people what time it was, although each person just pointed at the 
big yellow clock on the wall. 


92 



It was so strange to see him from a distance. So small. I cared for him in the world as I 
could not care for him in the apartment. I wanted to protect him from all of the terrible 
things that no one deserves. 

I got very close to him. Just behind him. I watched him write. It's a shame that we have to 
live, but it's a tragedy that we get to live only one life. I stepped back. I could not be that 
close. Not even then. 

From behind a column I watched him write more, and ask for the time, and rub his rough 
hands against his knees. Yes and No. 

I watched him get in the line to buy tickets. 

I wondered. When am I going to stop him from leaving? 

I didn't know how to ask him or tell him or beg him. 

When he got to the front of the line I went up to him. 

I touched his shoulder. 

I can see, I said. What a stupid thing to say. My eyes are crummy, but I can see. 

What are you doing here? he wrote with his hands. 

I felt suddenly shy. I was not used to shy. I was used to shame. 

Shyness is when you turn your head away from something you want. 

Shame is when you turn your head away from something you do not want. 

I know you are leaving, I said. 

You have to go home, he wrote. You should be in bed. 

OK, I said. I did not know how to say what I needed to say. 

Let me take you home. 

No. I do not want to go home. 

He wrote. You're being crazy. You're going to catch a cold. 

I already have a cold. 

You are going to catch a colder. 

I could not believe he was making a joke. And I could not believe I laughed. 

The laughter sent my thoughts to our kitchen table, where we would laugh and laugh. 

That table was where we were close to each other. 

It was instead of our bed. Everything in our apartment got confused. 

We would eat on the coffee table in the living room instead of at the dining room table. We 
wanted to be near the window. We filled the body of the grandfather clock with his empty 
daybooks, as if they were time itself. We put his filled daybooks in the bathtub of the sec- 
ond bathroom, because we never used it. I sleepwalk when I sleep at all. 

Once I turned on the shower. Some of the books floated, and some stayed where they 
were. When I awoke the next morning I saw what I had done. The water was gray with all 
of his days. I am not being crazy, I told him. You have to go home. 

I got tired, I told him. Not worn out, but worn through. Like one of those wives who 


93 



wakes up one morning and says I can't bake any more bread. 

You never baked bread, he wrote, and we were still joking. Then it's like I woke up and 
baked bread, I said, and we were joking even then. I wondered will there come a time 
when we won't be joking? And what would that look like? And how would that feel? 
When I was a girl, my life was music that was always getting louder. Everything moved 
me. A dog following a stranger. That made me feel so much. A calendar that showed the 
wrong month. I could have cried over it. I did. Where the smoke from a chimney ended. 
How an overturned bottle rested at the edge of a table. I spent my life learning to feel less. 
Every day I felt less. 

Is that growing old? Or is it something worse? You cannot protect yourself from sadness 
without protecting yourself from happiness. 

He hid his face in the covers of his daybook, as if the covers were his hands. He cried. For 
whom was he crying? For Anna? For his parents? For me? For himself? 

I pulled the book from him. It was wet with tears running down the pages, as if the book 
itself were crying. He hid his face in his hands. Fet me see you cry, I told him. 

I do not want to hurt you, he said by shaking his head left to right. It hurts me when you 
do not want to hurt me, I told him. Fet me see you cry. He lowered his hands. On one 
cheek it said YES backward. On one cheek it said NO backward. He was still looking 
down. Now the tears did not run down his cheeks, but fell from his eyes to the ground. Fet 
me see you cry, I said. I did not feel that he owed it to me. And I did not feel that I owed it 
to him. We owed it to each other, which is something different. He raised his head and 
looked at me. I am not angry with you, I told him. You must be. 

I am the one who broke the rule. 

But I am the one who made the rule you couldn't live with. My thoughts are wandering, 
Oskar. They are going to Dresden, to my mother's pearls, damp with the sweat of her 
neck. My thoughts are going up the sleeve of my father's overcoat. His arm was so thick 
and strong. I was sure it would protect me for as long as I lived. And it did. Even after I 
lost him. The memory of his arm wraps around me as his arm used to. Each day has been 
chained to the previous one. But the weeks have had wings. Anyone who believes that a 
second is faster than a decade did not live my life. Why are you leaving me? He wrote, I 
do not know how to live. I do not know either, but I am trying. I do not know how to try. 

There were things I wanted to tell him. But I knew they would hurt him. So I buried them, 
and let them hurt me. 

I put my hand on him. Touching him was always so important to me. It was something I 
lived for. I never could explain why. Tittle, nothing touches. My fingers against his shoul- 
der. The outsides of our thighs touching as we squeezed together on the bus. I couldn't 
explain it, but I needed it. Sometimes I imagined stitching all of our little touches together. 
How many hundreds of thousands of fingers brushing against each other does it take to 
make love? Why does anyone ever make love? 

My thoughts are going to my childhood, Oskar. To when I was a girl. I am sitting here 
thinking about fistfuls of pebbles, and the first time I noticed hairs under my arms. 

My thoughts are around my mother's neck. Her pearls. 


94 



When I first liked the smell of perfume, and how Anna and I would lie in the darkness of 
our bedroom, in the warmth of our bed. 

I told her one night what I had seen behind the shed behind our house. 

She made me promise never to speak a word about it. I promised her. 

Can I watch you kiss? 

Can you watch us kiss? 

You could tell me where you are going to kiss, and I could hide and watch. 

She laughed, which was how she said yes. 

We woke up in the middle of the night. I do not know who woke up first. Or if we woke 
up at the same time. 

What does it feel like? I asked her. 

What does what feel like? 

To kiss. 

She laughed. 

It feels wet, she said. 

I laughed. 

It feels wet and warm and very strange at first. 

I laughed. 

Like this, she said, and she grabbed the sides of my face and pulled me into her. 

I had never felt so in love in my life, and I have not felt so in love since. 

We were innocent. 

How could anything be more innocent than the two of us kissing in that bed? 

How could anything less deserve to be destroyed? 

I told him, I will try harder if you will stay. 

OK, he wrote. 

Just please do not leave me. 

OK. 

We never have to mention this. 

OK. 

I am thinking about shoes, for some reason. How many pairs I have worn in my life. And 
how many times my feet have slipped into and out of them. And how I put them at the 
foot of the bed, pointing away from the bed. 

My thoughts are going down a chimney and burning. Footsteps above. Frying onions. 
Clinking crystal. We were not rich, but there was nothing we wanted. From my bedroom 
window I watched the world. And I was safe from the world. I watched my father fall 
apart. The nearer the war came, the farther he went. Was that the only way he knew to 
protect us? He spent hours in his shed every night. Sometimes he would sleep in there. On 
the floor. 


95 



He wanted to save the world. That's what he was like. But he wouldn't put our family in 
danger. That's what he was like. He must have weighed my life against a life he might 
have been able to save. Or ten. Or one hundred. He must have decided that my life 
weighed more than one hundred lives. 

His hair turned gray that winter. I thought it was snow. He promised us that everything 
would be OK. I was a child, but I knew that everything would not be OK. That did not 
make my father a liar. It made him my father. 

It was the morning of the bombing that I decided to write back to the forced laborer. I do 
not know why I waited for so long, or what made me want to write to him then. 

He had asked me to include a photograph of myself. I did not have any photographs of 
myself that I liked. I understand, now, the tragedy of my childhood. It wasn't the bomb- 
ing. It was that I never once liked a photograph of myself. I couldn't. 

I decided I would go to a photographer the next day and have a picture taken. 

That night I tried on all of my outfits in front of the mirror. I felt like an ugly movie star. I 
asked my mother to teach me about makeup. She didn't ask why. 

She showed me how to rouge my cheeks. And how to paint my eyes. She had never 
touched my face so much. There had never been an excuse to. 

My forehead. My chin. My temples. My neck. Why was she crying? 

I left the unfinished letter on my desk. The paper helped our house burn. I should have 
sent it off with an ugly photograph. I should have sent off everything. 

The airport was filled with people coming and going. But it was only your grandfather 
and me. 

I took his daybook and searched its pages. I pointed at. How frustrating, how pathetic, 
how sad. 

He searched through the book and pointed at. The way you just handed me that knife. 

I pointed at. If I'd been someone else in a different world I'd've done something different. 

He pointed at. Sometimes one simply wants to disappear. I pointed at. There's nothing 
wrong with not understanding yourself. He pointed at. How sad. 

I pointed at. And I wouldn't say no to something sweet. He pointed at. Cried and cried 
and cried. I pointed at. Don't cry. He pointed at. Broken and confused. I pointed at. So sad. 
He pointed at. Broken and confused. I pointed at. Something. He pointed at. Nothing. I 
pointed at. Something. Nobody pointed at, I love you. 

There was no way around it. We could not climb over it, or walk until we found its edge. 

I regret that it takes a life to learn how to live, Oskar. Because if I were able to live my life 
again, I would do things differently. I would change my life. 

I would kiss my piano teacher, even if he laughed at me. I would jump with Mary on the 
bed, even if I made a fool of myself. I would send out ugly photographs, thousands of 
them. 

What are we going to do? he wrote. It's up to you, I said. He wrote, I want to go home. 
What is home to you? Home is the place with the most rules. I understood him. 


96 



And we will have to make more rules, I said. To make it more of a home. Yes. OK. 

We went straight to the jewelry store. He left the suitcase in the back room. We sold a pair 
of emerald earrings that day. And a diamond engagement ring. And a gold bracelet for a 
little girl. And a watch for someone on his way to Brazil. 

That night we held each other in bed. He kissed me all over. I believed him. I was not stu- 
pid. I was his wife. 

The next morning he went to the airport. I didn't dare feel his suitcase. 

I waited for him to come home. Hours passed. And minutes. I didn't open the store at 
11:00. 1 waited by the window. I still believed in him. I didn't eat lunch. Seconds passed. 

The afternoon left. The evening came. I didn't eat dinner. 

Years were passing through the spaces between moments. Your father kicked in my belly. 
What was he trying to tell me? I brought the birdcages to the windows. I opened the win- 
dows, and opened the birdcages. I poured the fish down the drain. 

I took the dogs and cats downstairs and removed their collars. I released the insects onto 
the street. And the reptiles. 

And the mice. 

I told them. Go. 

All of you. 

Go. 

And they went. 

And they didn't come back. 

MY FEELINGS 


I was in the guest room when it happened. I was watching the television and knitting you 
a white scarf. The news was on. Time was passing like a hand waving from a train that I 


124 



wanted to be on. You'd only just left for school, and I was already waiting for you. I hope 
you never think about anything as much as I think about you. I remember they were in- 
terviewing the father of a missing girl. I remember his eyebrows. I remember his sadly 
cleanly shaven face. Do you still believe that she will be found alive? I do. 

Sometimes I was looking at the television. Sometimes I was looking at my hands knitting 
your scarf. Sometimes out the window at your window. Are there any new leads in the 
case? Not to my knowledge. But you continue to believe. Yes. 

What would it take for you to give up? Why was it necessary to torture him? He touched 
his forehead and said. It would take a body. The woman asking the questions touched her 
ear. She said, I am sorry. One second. She said. Something has happened in New York. 

The father of the missing girl touched his chest and looked past the camera. At his wife? 

At someone he didn't know? At something he wanted to see? Maybe it sounds strange, but 
I didn't feel anything when they showed the burning building. I wasn't even surprised. I 
kept knitting for you, and I kept thinking about the father of the missing girl. He kept be- 
lieving. 

Smoke kept pouring from a hole in the building. Black smoke. 

I remember the worst storm of my childhood. From my window I saw the books pulled 
from my father's shelves. They flew. A tree that was older than any person tipped away 
from our house. But it could have been the other way. 

When the second plane hit, the woman who was giving the news started to scream. 

A ball of fire rolled out of the building and up. 

One million pieces of paper filled the sky. They stayed there, like a ring around the build- 
ing. Like the rings of Saturn. The rings of coffee staining my father's desk. The ring Tho- 
mas told me he didn't need. I told him he wasn't the only one who needed. The next morn- 
ing my father had us carve our names into the stump of the tree that fell away from our 
house. We were giving thanks. Your mother called. Are you watching the news? Yes. 

Have you heard from Thomas? No. 

I haven't heard from him either. I'm worried. Why are you worried? I told you. I haven't 
heard from him. But he's at the store. 

He had a meeting in that building and I haven't heard from him. I turned my head and 
thought I would vomit. I dropped the phone, ran to the toilet, and vomited. I wouldn't 
ruin the rug. That's who I am. I called your mother back. 

She told me you were at home. She had just spoken to you. I told her I would go over and 
watch you. Don't let him see the news. 

OK. 

If he asks anything, just let him know that it will be OK. I told her. It will be OK. 

She said. The subways are a mess. I'm going to walk home. I should be there in an hour. 
She said, I love you. 

She had been married to your father for twelve years. I had known her for fifteen years. It 
was the first time she told me she loved me. That was when I knew that she knew. I ran 
across the street. 


125 



The doorman said you'd gone up ten minutes before. He asked if I was all right. I nodded. 
What happened to your arm? 

I looked at my arm. It was bleeding through my shirt. Had I fallen and not noticed? Had I 
been scratching it? That was when I knew that I knew. 

No one answered the door when I rang, so I used my key. I called to you. Oskar! 

You were silent, but I knew you were there. I could feel you. Oskar! 

I looked in the coat closet. I looked behind the sofa. A Scrabble board was on the coffee ta- 
ble. Words were running into each other. I went to your room. It was empty. I looked in 
your closet. You weren't there. I went to your parents' room. I knew you were somewhere. 
I looked in your father's closet. I touched the tuxedo that was over his chair. I put my 
hands in its pockets. He had his father's hands. Your grandfather's hands. Will you have 
those hands? The pockets reminded me. 

I went back to your room and lay down on your bed. I couldn't see the stars on your ceil- 
ing because the lights were on. I thought about the walls of the house I grew up in. My 
fingerprints. When the walls collapsed, my fingerprints collapsed. I heard you breathing 
beneath me. Oskar? 

I got on the ground. On my hands and knees. 

Is there room for two under there? 

No. 

Are you sure? 

Positive. 

Would it be all right if I tried? 

I guess. 

I could only barely squeeze myself under the bed. 

We lay there on our backs. There wasn't enough room to turn to face each other. None of 
the light could reach us. 

How was school? 

It was OK. 

You got there on time? 

I was early. 

So you waited outside? 

Yeah. 

What did you do? 

I read. 

What? 

What what? 

What did you read? 

A Brief History of Time 


126 



Is it any good? 

That's not really a question you can ask about it. 

And your walk home? 

It was OK. 

It's beautiful weather. 

Yeah. 

I can't remember more beautiful weather than this. 

That's true. 

It's a shame to be inside. 

I guess so. 

But here we are. 

I wanted to turn to face him, but I couldn't. I moved my hand to touch his hand. 

They let you out of school? 

Practically immediately. 

Do you know what happened? 

Yeah. 

Have you heard from Mom or Dad? 

Mom. 

What did she say? 

She said everything was fine and she would be home soon. 

Dad will be home soon, too. Once he can close up the store. 

Yeah. 

You pressed your palms into the bed like you were trying to lift it off us. 

I wanted to tell you something, but I didn't know what. I just knew there was something I 
needed to tell you. 

Do you want to show me your stamps? 

No thank you. 

Or we could do some thumb wars. 

Maybe later. 

Are you hungry? 

No. 

Do you want to just wait here for Mom and Dad to come home? 

I guess so. 

Do you want me to wait here with you? 

It's OK. 


127 



Are you sure? 

Positive. 

Can I please, Oskar? 

OK. 

Sometimes I felt like the space was collapsing onto us. Someone was on the bed. Mary 
jumping. Your father sleeping. Anna kissing me. 

I felt buried. Anna holding the sides of my face. My father pinching my cheeks. Every- 
thing on top of me. 

When your mother came home, she gave you such a fierce hug. I wanted to protect you 
from her. 

She asked if your father had called. 

No. 

Are there any messages on the phone? 

No. 

You asked her if your father was in the building for a meeting. She told you no. 

You tried to find her eyes, and that was when I knew that you knew. She called the police. 
It was busy. She called again. It was busy. She kept calling. When it wasn't busy, she asked 
to speak to someone. There was no one to speak to. 

You went to the bathroom. I told her to control herself. At least in front of you. 

She called the newspapers. They didn't know anything. She called the fire department. No 
one knew anything. 

All afternoon I knitted that scarf for you. It grew longer and longer. Your mother closed 
the windows, but we could still smell the smoke. She asked me if I thought we should 
make posters. I said it might be a good idea. 

That made her cry, because she had been depending on me. The scarf grew longer and 
longer. 

She used the picture from your vacation. From only two weeks before. It was you and 
your father. When I saw it, I told her she shouldn't use a picture that had your face in it. 
She said she wasn't going to use the whole picture. Only your father's face. I told her. Still, 
it isn't a good idea. 

She said. There are more important things to worry about. Just use a different picture. Let 
it go. Mom. She had never called me Mom. There are so many pictures to choose from. 
Mind your own business. This is my business. We were not angry at each other. 

I don't know how much you understood, but probably you understood everything. 

She took the posters downtown that afternoon. She filled a rolling suitcase with them. I 
thought of your grandfather. I wondered where he was at that moment. I didn't know if I 
wanted him to be suffering. 

She took a stapler. And a box of staples. And tape. I think of those things now. The paper, 
the stapler, the staples, the tape. It makes me sick. Physical things. Forty years of loving 


128 



someone becomes staples and tape. 

It was just the two of us. You and me. 

We played games in the living room. You made jewelry. The scarf grew longer and longer. 
We went for a walk in the park. We didn't talk about what was on top of us. What was 
pinning us down like a ceiling. When you fell asleep with your head on my lap, I turned 
on the television. 

I lowered the volume until it was silent. 

The same pictures over and over. 

Planes going into buildings. 

Bodies falling. 

People waving shirts out of high windows. 

Planes going into buildings. 

Bodies falling. 

Planes going into buildings. 

People covered in gray dust. 

Bodies falling. 

Buildings falling. 

Planes going into buildings. 

Planes going into buildings. 

Buildings falling. 

People waving shirts out of high windows. 

Bodies falling. 

Planes going into buildings. 

Sometimes I felt your eyelids nickering. Were you awake? Or dreaming? 

Your mother came home late that night. The suitcase was empty. 

She hugged you until you said. You're hurting me. 

She called everyone your father knew, and everyone who might know something. She told 
them, I'm sorry to wake you. I wanted to shout into her ear. Don't be sorry! 

She kept touching her eyes, although there were no tears. 

They thought there would be thousands of injured people. Unconscious people. People 
without memories. They thought there would be thousands of bodies. They were going to 
put them in an ice-skating rink. 

Remember when we went skating a few months ago and I turned around, because I told 
you that watching people skate gave me a headache? I saw rows of bodies under the ice. 
Your mother told me I could go home. I told her I didn't want to. She said. Have some- 
thing to eat. Try to sleep. I won't be able to eat or sleep. She said, I need to sleep. I told her 
I loved her. 

That made her cry, because she had been depending on me. I went back across the street. 


129 



Planes going into buildings. Bodies falling. Planes going into buildings. Buildings falling. 
Planes going into buildings. Planes going into buildings. Planes going into buildings. 

When I no longer had to be strong in front of you, I became very weak. I brought myself to 
the ground, which was where I belonged. I hit the floor with my fists. I wanted to break 
my hands, but when it hurt too much, I stopped. I was too selfish to break my hands for 
my only child. 

Bodies falling. Staples and tape. 

I didn't feel empty. I wished I'd felt empty. People waving shirts out of high windows. 

I wanted to be empty like an overturned pitcher. But I was full like a stone. 

Planes going into buildings. 

I had to go to the bathroom. I didn't want to get up. I wanted to lie in my own waste, 
which is what I deserved. I wanted to be a pig in my own filth. But I got up and went to 
the bathroom. That's who I am. 

Bodies falling. Buildings falling. 

The rings of the tree that fell away from our house. I wanted so much for it to be me under 
the rubble. Even for a minute. A second. It was as simple as wanting to take his place. And 
it was more complicated than that. The television was the only light. Planes going into 
buildings. Planes going into buildings. 

I thought it would feel different. But even then I was me. Oskar, I'm remembering you on- 
stage in front of all of those strangers. I wanted to say to them. He's mine. I wanted to 
stand up and shout. That beautiful person is mine! Mine! When I was watching you, I was 
so proud and so sad. Alas. His lips. Your songs. 

When I looked at you, my life made sense. Even the bad things made sense. They were 
necessary to make you possible. Alas. Your songs. My parents' lives made sense. My 
grandparents'. Even Anna's life. 

But I knew the truth, and that's why I was so sad. Every moment before this one depends 
on this one. Everything in the history of the world can be proven wrong in one moment. 

Your mother wanted to have a funeral, even though there was no body. What could any- 
one say? 

We all rode in the limousine together. I could not stop touching you. I could not touch you 
enough. I needed more hands. You made jokes with the driver, but I could see that inside 
you were suffering. Making him laugh was how you suffered. When we got to the grave 
and they lowered the empty coffin, you let out a noise like an animal. I had never heard 
anything like it. You were a wounded animal. The noise is still in my ears. It was what I 
had spent forty years looking for, what I wanted my life and life story to be. Your mother 
took you to the side and held you. They shoveled dirt into your father's grave. Onto my 
son's empty coffin. There was nothing there. All of my sounds were lock inside me. The 
limousine took us home. Everyone was silent. 

When we got to my building, you walked me to the front door. The doorman said there 
was a letter for me. I told him I'd look at it tomorrow or the next day. The doorman said 
the person had just dropped it off. I said. Tomorrow. 


130 



The doorman said. He seemed desperate. I asked you to read it for me. I said. My eyes are 
crummy. You opened it. I'm sorry, you said. Why are you sorry? No, that's what it says. I 
took it from you and looked at it. 

When your grandfather left me forty years ago, I erased all of his writing. I washed the 
words from the mirrors and the floors. I painted over the walls. I cleaned the shower cur- 
tains. I even refinished the floors. It took me as long as I had known him to get rid of all of 
his words. Like turning an hourglass over. 

I thought he had to look for what he was looking for, and realize it no longer existed, or 
never existed. I thought he would write. Or send money. Or ask for pictures of the baby, if 
not me. For forty years not a word. Only empty envelopes. 

And then, on the day of my son's funeral, two words. I'm sorry. He had come back. 

MY FEELINGS 


A knocking woke me up in the middle of the night. I had been dreaming about where I 
came from. I put on my robe and went to the door. 

Who could it be? Why didn't the doorman ring up? A neighbor? But why? 

More knocking. I looked through the peephole. It was your grandfather. 

Come in. Where were you? Are you OK? The bottoms of his pants were covered in dirt. 
Are you OK? He nodded. 

Come in. Let me clean you off. What happened? He shrugged his shoulders. Did someone 
hurt you? He showed me his right hand. Are you hurt? 

We went to the kitchen table and sat down. Next to each other. The windows were black. 
He put his hands on his knees. I slid closer to him until our sides touched. I put my head 
on his shoulder. I wanted as much of us to touch as possible. I told him. You have to tell 
me what happened for me to be able to help. He took a pen from his shirt pocket but there 
was nothing to write on. I gave him my open hand. He wrote, I want to get you some 
magazines. 

In my dream, all of the collapsed ceilings reformed above us. The fire went back into the 
bombs, which rose up and into the bellies of planes whose propellers turned backward, 
like the second hands of the clocks across Dresden, only faster. I wanted to slap him with 
his words. 

I wanted to shout. It isn't fair, and bang my fists against the table like a child. 

Anything special? he asked on my arm. Everything special, I said. Art magazines? Yes. 
Nature magazines? Yes. 

Politics? Yes. 

Celebrities? Yes. 

I told him to bring a suitcase so he could come back with one of everything. 

I wanted him to be able to take his things with him. In my dream, spring came after sum- 
mer, came after fall, came after winter, came after spring. 

I made him breakfast. I tried to make it delicious. I wanted him to have good memories, so 
that maybe he would come back again one day. Or at least miss me. 


180 



I wiped the rim of the plate before I gave it to him. I spread his napkin on his lap. He did- 
n't say anything. When the time came, I went downstairs with him. There was nothing to 
write on, so he wrote on me. I might not be back until late. I told him I understood. He 
wrote. I'm going to get you magazines. I told him, I don't want any magazines. Maybe not 
now, but you'll be grateful to have them. My eyes are crummy. Your eyes are perfect. 
Promise me that you'll take care. 

He wrote. I'm only going to get magazines. 

Don't cry, I said, by putting my fingers on my face and pushing imaginary tears up my 
cheeks and back into my eyes. I was angry because they were my tears. I told him. You're 
only getting magazines. He showed me his left hand. 

I tried to notice everything, because I wanted to be able to remember it perfectly. I've for- 
gotten everything important in my life. I can't remember what the front door of the house I 
grew up in looked like. Or who stopped kissing first, me or my sister. Or the view from 
any window but my own. Some nights I lay awake for hours trying to remember my 
mother's face. He turned around and walked away from me. 

I went back up to the apartment and sat on the sofa waiting. Waiting for what? 

I can't remember the last thing my father said to me. He was trapped under the ceiling. 

The plaster that covered him was turning red. 

He said, I can't feel everything. 

I didn't know if he'd meant to say he couldn't feel anything. He asked. Where is Mommy? 

I didn't know if he was talking about my mother or his. I tried to pull the ceiling off him. 
He said. Can you find my glasses for me? 

I told him I would look for them. But everything had been buried. I had never seen my fa- 
ther cry before. He said. With my glasses I could be helpful. I told him. Let me try to free 
you. He said. Find my glasses. 

They were shouting for everyone to get out. The rest of the ceiling was about to collapse. I 
wanted to stay with him. But I knew he would want me to leave him. I told him. Daddy, I 
have to leave you. Then he said something. 

It was the last thing he ever said to me. I can't remember it. 

In my dream, the tears went up his cheeks and back into his eyes. I got up off the sofa and 
filled a suitcase with the typewriter and as much paper as would fit. 

I wrote a note and taped it to the window. I didn't know whom it was for. 

I went from room to room turning off the lights. I made sure none of the faucets were 
dripping. I turned off the heat and unplugged the appliances. I closed all the windows. 

As the cab drove me away, I saw the note. But I couldn't read it because my eyes are 
crummy. 

In my dream, painters separated green into yellow and blue. Brown into the rainbow. 

Children pulled color from coloring books with crayons, and mothers who had lost chil- 
dren mended their black clothing with scissors. I think about all of the things I've done, 
Oskar. And all of the things I didn't do. The mistakes I've made are dead to me. But I can't 


181 



take back the things I never did. 

I found him in the international terminal. He was sitting at a table with his hands on his 
knees. I watched him all morning. 

He asked people what time it was, and each person pointed at the clock on the wall. 

I have been an expert at watching him. It's been my life's work. From my bedroom win- 
dow. From behind trees. From across the kitchen table. I wanted to be with him. Or any- 
one. 

I don't know if I've ever loved your grandfather. But I've loved not being alone. I got very 
close to him. I wanted to shout myself into his ear. I touched his shoulder. He lowered his 
head. 

How could you? 

He wouldn't show me his eyes. I hate silence. 

Say something. 

He took his pen from his shirt pocket and the top napkin from the stack on the table. 

He wrote. You were happy when I was away. 

How could you think that? 

We are lying to ourselves and to each other. 

Lying about what? I don't care if we're lying. 

I am a bad person. 

I don't care. I don't care what you are. 

I can't. 

What's killing you? 

He took another napkin from the stack. 

He wrote. You're killing me. 

And then I was silent. 

He wrote. You remind me. 

I put my hands on the table and told him. You have me. 

He took another napkin and wrote, Anna was pregnant. 

I told him, I know. She told me. 

You know? 

I didn't think you knew. She said it was a secret. I'm glad you know. 

He wrote, I'm sorry I know. 

It's better to lose than never to have had. 

I lost something I never had. 

You had everything. 

When did she tell you? 

We were in bed talking. 


182 



He pointed at. When. 

Near the end. 

What did she say? 

She said. I'm going to have a baby. 

Was she happy? 

She was overjoyed. 

Why didn't you say anything? 

Why didn't you? 

In my dream, people apologized for things that were about to happen, and lit candles by 
inhaling. 

I have been seeing Oskar, he wrote. 

I know. 

You know? 

Of course I know. 

He flipped back to. Why didn't you say anything? 

Why didn't you? 

~ -A, /V 

The alphabet went z, y, x, wAi AA ! 

~ /\ /V, 

The clocks went tock-tick, tock-tickA(t AA ! 

He wrote, I was with him last night. That's where I was. I buried the letters. 

What letters? 

The letters I never sent. 

Buried them where? 

In the ground. That's where I was. I buried the key, too. 

What key? 

To your apartment. 

Our apartment. 

He put his hands on the table. 

Lovers pulled up each other's underwear, buttoned each other's shirts, and dressed and 
dressed and dressed. 

I told him. Say it. 

When I saw Anna for the last time. 

Say it. 

When we. 

Say it! 

He put his hands on his knees. 

I wanted to hit him. 


183 



I wanted to hold him. 

I wanted to shout myself into his ear. 

I asked. So what happens now? 

I don't know. 

Do you want to go home? 

He flipped back to, I can't. Then you'll go away? He pointed at, I can't. Then we are out of 
options. We sat there. 

Things were happening around us, but nothing was happening between us. 

Above us, the screens said which flights were landing and which were taking off. Madrid 
departing. Rio arriving. Stockholm departing. Paris departing. Milan arriving. 

Everyone was coming or going. 

People around the world were moving from one place to another. No one was staying. I 
said. What if we stay? Stay? 

Here. What if we stay here at the airport? He wrote. Is that another joke? I shook my head 
no. How could we stay here? 

I told him. There are pay phones, so I could call Oskar and let him know I'm OK. And 
there are paper stores where you could buy daybooks and pens. There are places to eat. 
And money machines. And bathrooms. Even televisions. Not coming or going. Not some- 
thing or nothing. Not yes or no. 

My dream went all the way back to the beginning. The rain rose into the clouds, and the 
animals descended the ramp. Two by two. Two giraffes. Two spiders. Two goats. 

Two lions. Two mice. Two monkeys. Two snakes. Two elephants. 

The rain came after the rainbow. 

As I type this, we are sitting across from each other at a table. It's not big, but it's big 
enough for the two of us. He has a cup of coffee and I am drinking tea. 

When the pages are in the typewriter, I can't see his face. In that way I am choosing you 
over him. I don't need to see him. I don't need to know if he is looking up at me. It's not 
even that I trust him not to leave. I know this won't last. I'd rather be me than him. The 
words are coming so easily. The pages are coming easily. 

At the end of my dream. Eve put the apple back on the branch. The tree went back into the 
ground. It became a sapling, which became a seed. 

God brought together the land and the water, the sky and the water, the water and the wa- 
ter, evening and morning, something and nothing. He said. Let there be light. And there 
was darkness. Oskar. 

The night before I lost everything was like any other night. Anna and I kept each other 
awake very late. We laughed. Young sisters in a bed under the roof of their childhood 
home. Wind on the window. 

How could anything less deserve to be destroyed? I thought we would be awake all night. 
Awake for the rest of our lives. The spaces between our words grew. 


184 



It became difficult to tell when we were talking and when we were silent. The hairs of our 
arms touched. 

It was late, and we were tired. 

We assumed there would be other nights. 

Anna's breathing started to slow, but I still wanted to talk. 

She rolled onto her side. 

I said, I want to tell you something. 

She said. You can tell me tomorrow. 

I had never told her how much I loved her. 

She was my sister. 

We slept in the same bed. 

There was never a right time to say it. 

It was always unnecessary. 

The books in my father's shed were sighing. 

The sheets were rising and falling around me with Anna's breathing. 

I thought about waking her. 

But it was unnecessary. 

There would be other nights. 

And how can you say I love you to someone you love? 

I rolled onto my side and fell asleep next to her. 

Here is the point of everything I have been trying to tell you, Oskar. 

It's always necessary. 

I love you. 

Grandma 

